
  THE TOPANGA CULTURE
  FINAL REPORT ON EXCAVATIONS, 1948


  BY A. E. TREGANZA AND A. BIERMAN


  ANTHROPOLOGICAL RECORDS
  Vol. 20, No. 2




  UNIVERSITY OF CALIFORNIA

  ANTHROPOLOGICAL RECORDS

  Editors (Los Angeles): C. W. Meighan, Harry Hoijer, Eshref Shevky
  Volume 20, No. 2, pp. 45-86, plates 17-24, 6 figs., 3 maps

  Submitted by editors July 15, 1957
  Issued March 27, 1958
  Price, $1.00

  University of California Press
  Berkeley and Los Angeles
  California

  Cambridge University Press
  London, England

  Manufactured in the United States of America




CONTENTS


                                                   _Page_

  Introduction                                       45

  Review of Earlier Work at the Tank Site            47

  Location and Description of Sites                  47

    Summary of Sites                                 51

  Field Techniques                                   51

  Features                                           53

  Burials                                            54

  Description of Artifacts                           55

    Flaked Tools                                     55
      Scraper Planes                                 56
      Scrapers                                       56
      Choppers                                       59
      Crescentic Stone or "Amulet"                   59
      Drill or Reamer                                59
      Hand Pick                                      59
      Projectile Points                              59
      Small "Dart" Points                            61
      Large Blades and Large Points                  61

    Ground or Pecked Stone                           63
      Manos and Metates                              63
      Mortars                                        65
      Pestles                                        65
      Abrading Stones                                65
      Cog Stones                                     65
      Stone Disks                                    66
      Rubbing Stones                                 67
      Core Hammerstones                              67
      Cobble Hammerstones                            67
      Slate Pendants                                 67
      Miscellaneous Artifacts                        67

    Bone Implements                                  68

    Other Remains                                    68
      Unworked Bone and Shell                        68
      Fossil Remains                                 68
      Pigments                                       68

  Excavation of Site LAn-2                           69

    Disposal of the Dead                             70

  Description of Artifacts                           70

    Flaked Tools                                     70
      Projectile Points                              70

    Ground or Pecked Stone                           71
      Metates                                        71
      Manos                                          71
      Mortars                                        71
      Pestles                                        71
      Rubbing Stones                                 71
      Stone Disks                                    71
      Pendants                                       71

    Other Remains                                    71
      Unworked Bone and Shell Remains                71

  Summary and Conclusion                             72

  Bibliography                                       76

  Plates                                             79


  _MAPS_

  1. Topanga Canyon                           facing 49

  2. Tank Site LAn-1                          facing 53

  3. Site LAn-2                                      69


  _FIGURES_

  1. Location of Features and Burials                55

  2. Scraper Plane Types                             57

  3. Scraper Types                                   58

  4. Projectile Points                               60

  5. Metate Types                                    62

  6. Mano Types                                      64


  _TABLES_

  1. Burials LAn-1                                   54

  2. Frequency of Scraper Planes by Depth            56

  3. Frequency of Flaked Artifacts by Depth          59

  4. Projectile Points                               61

  5. Mano Types                                      63

  6. Burial Data on Site LAn-2                       70

  7. Flaked Tools and Materials from LAn-2           70

  8. Suggested Chronology of Early Milling and
     Hunting Cultures of Southern California         74




THE TOPANGA CULTURE FINAL REPORT ON EXCAVATIONS, 1948

BY A. E. TREGANZA AND A. BIERMAN




INTRODUCTION


The year 1946 marked the discovery of the Tank Site by Robert F. Heizer
and Edwin M. Lemert. Their work was synthesized in a paper entitled
"Observations on Archaeological Sites in Topanga Canyon, California"
(Heizer and Lemert, 1947). Here, so far as the small sample from test pits
and surface collections permitted, they briefly defined the Topanga
Culture, described the artifacts related to it, and indicated its possible
cultural associations. Heizer and the senior author of the present paper
were convinced that the Tank Site could fruitfully be further examined in
the light of large-scale excavation. This was considered necessary to
determine more closely the context of the Topanga artifacts, and the
nature of the occupation here expressed. The answers to these two problems
should contribute importantly to our understanding of the archaeology of
southern California.

In the spring of 1947 R. L. Beals, of the University of California, Los
Angeles, and R. F. Heizer, of the University of California, Berkeley,
agreed to sent a joint party into the field the following summer. This
coöperation between the two institutions marked a new step in furthering
the progress of archaeological research in California, and gave students
an opportunity to participate in active field research. In June, 1947, the
senior author, assisted by Miss Consuelo Malamud, a graduate student at
UCLA, initiated excavation at the Tank Site. Undergraduate and graduate
students from both campuses of the university as well as from San
Francisco State College acted as volunteer workers. The results of this
investigation have appeared under the title, "The Topanga Culture: First
Season's Excavation of the Tank Site, 1947" (Treganza and Malamud, 1950).

The activities of the first season should have brought to light a fairly
representative sample from the site, but time imposed certain limitations,
and much of what was uncovered only added to the list of problems.
Further, the Tank Site as a unit was, presumably, known with some
certainty, but there was little comparative material in which to frame the
results. Therefore, three major lines of evidence remained to be
investigated: (1) Additional excavation was necessary to verify the
possible stratigraphy noted and to fill out the burial data and certify
the typology established on the basis of the finds to date. Moreover, the
Tank Site had demonstrated itself to be a deposit of unusual interest and
importance; whatever added knowledge could be gained from it would be
valuable. (2) LAn-2, just west of the Tank Site, required more intensive
examination. From surface collections and test pits it was apparent that
this site afforded clues to the interpretation and extension of the
stratigraphy noted at the Tank Site, and it might represent a cultural
development heretofore undescribed for the area. (3) A survey of the
canyon should be undertaken so that the Topanga Culture could be viewed
beyond its narrowly known confines. The problem was to gain an estimate of
the number of lithic sites within the canyon drainage, and the points of
similarity and difference between these and the Tank Site.

With the above three problems in mind, archaeological investigations were
renewed in Topanga Canyon on the same coöperative basis as the previous
year. We are indebted to the following students, drawn from the three
state institutions mentioned above, for volunteering their time and
energies in behalf of the project: Richard Bachenheimer, Alan Beals, Hal
Eberhart, Robert Farrell, David Frederickson, William King, Harland
Kinsey, Joseph Kreisler, Donald Lathrap, Albert Mohr, Arnold Pilling, and
Barbara Wyman. The authors acted, respectively, as field director and
assistant field director. Agnes Bierman and Albert Mohr are responsible
for most of the field photography, mapping, and surveying.

The general conclusions reached in 1947 were not substantially altered by
the additional excavation. Nor did it help to solve all the dubious
aspects of the Topanga Culture. As might be expected, it led, rather, to
the formulation of further questions. However, new specimens and more
complete data add fullness to this report, and it is hoped these will
increase its utility for comparative studies.

With respect to physiographic location and archaeological assemblage, the
Tank Site does not conform to other sites previously known for the general
environs. Comparisons with the earliest horizon yet recognized to the
north, the Oak Grove of the Santa Barbara region (Rogers, D. B., 1929),
seem to offer the most satisfactory parallels as related to mortuary
practices and milling activities; however, inasmuch as the Oak Grove
Culture is not characterized as having a well-defined flake and core
industry we are forced through necessity to seek further comparative data
as expressed in the cultural inventory of the San Dieguito complex in the
extreme southern coastal area of southern California and among the remains
from the region of ancient Lake Mohave in the eastern desert. It is both
interesting and a problematical that here at Topanga we find in a single
cultural complex an almost complete record of all the recognized cultural
elements typifying early man in southern California. In addition to this
early-man complex there remains a residue of material which appears to be
best associated with cultural traits characteristic of a "middle" time
position. Such middle cultures can be tentatively identified with Point
Dume, the lower levels of Malaga Cove, the Little Sycamore, the Hunting
Culture of Santa Barbara, the Pinto-gypsum of the desert, and the La Jolla
phases of San Diego although the latter are at present poorly defined. At
the Tank Site (LAn-1) these traits, which are of "middle" position, have
been named Topanga Phase II, and significantly enough they are confined to
the upper 18 inches of the deposit. Site LAn-2, excavated this season,
proved to be almost exclusively Phase II from top to bottom. Since these
two sites occupy almost contiguous positions and with the distribution of
cultural elements being such as it is, the suggested cultural stratigraphy
observed in 1947 seems to be fairly well confirmed.

In addition to the economic and subsistence aspects we now know something
concerning the socioreligious patterns as practiced at the Tank Site.
Disposal of the dead is expressed in three forms: (1) primary inhumation
in the flesh; (2) partial reburials under metates; and (3) fractional
burials with interment of leg bones only. This variation in a single site
is of interest. Formality appears present only in the first form; here all
the bodies were fully extended with the heads orientated toward the south.
Other than manos and metates, mortuary offerings were rare. In only one
instance (Treganza and Malamud, 1950, burial 3) did we find what could be
called a positive artifact association, that of a chert blade and a quartz
crystal.

Artifacts of apparent nonutilitarian usage leave us with the convenient,
but not to satisfactory, classification of "ceremonial." It is only
through inference that we can assume functional use in ceremonies of such
objects as cog stones and a variety of stone disks. Since the
spindle-shaped charm stone and the stone cogs and disks appear to be
nearly mutually exclusive of one another in their distribution between
central and southern California, it is not improbable that the latter
constitute the "charm-stones" of the south.

Too frequently typological construct and metric measurements lead to
sterility of interpretation divorced of any humanistic concept. At one
time the Tank Site was occupied by a living culture and to some degree the
occupants must have participated in activities other than those
surrounding a fulfillment of a food economy. To this point it is difficult
to explain large lithic concentrations consisting of unworked stone,
broken metates and manos, core tools, and occasional sections of human
long bones. Such occurrences are too large and too frequent to have
resulted from mere chance, and for this reason we have given them the term
"features." The material content of these aggregations suggests refuse
dumps of worn out and broken implements, but if so they would collectively
have occupied a considerable part of the central living area. Conceivably
their central location could suggest some ceremonial involving the concept
of a "shrine." That these features could represent some manifestation of
the "Annual Mourning Ceremony" seems most dubious. Irrespective of the
probability that the Mourning Ceremony is ancient in southern California
the differences in cultural inventory and time between the Tank Site and
the early and historic phases of the Gabrielino are such that it would be
wishful thinking to imply any historical connection.

Earlier the Topanga Culture as depicted by the Tank Site has been
characterized as largely constituting a seed-gathering economy. This
characterization rests upon the presence of a large number of manos and
metates as opposed to the decided rarity of projectile points and the near
absence of mammal bone in the site deposit. Some what of a problem is the
high ratio of core and flake tools. In American archaeology it has been
popular to assume that flaked lithic assemblages automatically imply a
hunting and skin-dressing economy. Possibly this assumption represents an
Old World hangover with its overemphasis upon faunal associations merely
because of their tangible nature as opposed to the lack of preservation of
organic plant remains. In the light of all evidence, the situation at the
Tank Site strongly suggests the possibility of alternative interpretations
up to the point where we might consider a dual usage, or if the data
permit, emphasize either a plant or animal economy.

During the first season's excavations it was our belief that the area
excavated at the Tank Site was, so far as we knew, undisturbed, and any
conclusions reached rested upon that basis. It is significant to note that
during this season, as a result of our regional survey, we contacted a man
named Trujillo, a resident of Topanga Canyon for some sixty years, and
from him we gained considerable information pertaining to the Tank Site
and the Topanga Culture in general. Mr. Trujillo informed us that it was
his practice for some years before 1920 to plant a small hay crop over the
area we were presently excavating, and prior to the first planting he had
removed numerous oaks and pointed out a now dead, native black walnut that
was alive during his earlier days of cultivation. Mr. Trujillo was fully
aware that this was an archaeological site and told us he was forced to
move many metates and large stones away from the area under cultivation.
This action on his part may account in some measure for the somewhat
reduced number of large stones in the very upper levels of the site (0 to
8 inches). As the habitation deposit occupies the very top of a knoll, the
frequent plowing must have increased surface erosion to some degree.

Unknown to us earlier were two springs near the Tank Site which possibly
had some bearing on the original selection of this local. It was through
Mr. Trujillo that these springs and several additional Topanga Culture
sites were found. Mr. Trujillo, in his own way, had come to recognize
these metate- and mano-bearing sites to be old and contrasted, as he says,
"with the sites down along the creek where the soil is soft and dark with
some sea shell and where mortars occur and the burials are all folded up."
Such characteristics are typical of sites occurring in the protohistoric
and historic period.

Probably most significant of this season's work was the partial excavation
of LAn-2 located on the same ridge and about 350 yards below the Tank
Site. Through our efforts here we were able to confirm the suspected
stratigraphy in the Tank Site and, at least partly, define Phase II of the
Topanga Culture. Of greatest contrast is the appearance of flexed burials
and the exclusive occurrence of light projectile points. Although core and
flake tools are still present, a definite shift occurs in the material
from which they are made and the tools themselves do not dominate the
cultural inventory.

From the Tank Site the artifact yield per cubic foot almost doubled that
of the 1947 season. From the removal of approximately 2,496 cubic feet of
mound we obtained 5,895 typable artifacts (all specimens and original data
for 1947-1948 are now deposited in the Museum of Anthropology, University
of California, Berkeley) or on the average of 2.3 artifacts per cubic foot
of dirt removed. Compared to other California mounds, this figure is
exceptionally high. Only in the Sacramento Valley among Late Horizon sites
where baked clay objects were manufactured as a substitute for stone do
figures run correspondingly as high, and even here one has to consider a
single class of artifacts rather than a full range as expressed in the
Tank Site. One explanation for the great increase for this season is that
most of our excavations were conducted in the shallow part of the site (0
to 8 inches) where the bulk of the artifacts occurred.




REVIEW OF EARLIER WORK AT THE TANK SITE


Concerted excavation at the Tank Site was first carried on from June 19 to
August 5, 1947. The immediate aim was to explore as fully as time
permitted the nature and extent of the deposit. In the main, interest
revolved on cutting long trenches, test pitting, and expanding in
favorable areas. The compact nature of the soil and the heavy artifact
yield retarded clearing. Nevertheless, some 5,000 cubic feet of mound
earth was removed which bore an artifact content of one finished implement
to every 1.5 cubic feet.

Within the limitations imposed by archaeological conditions, the
excavation made possible certain inferences regarding the over-all pattern
and associated complexes derived from an open site typified by crude
percussion-flaked core tools and basic milling implements. The chipped
stone has been compared to that described for the San Dieguito and Lake
Mohave cultures. It includes a somewhat ill-defined variety of scraper
planes, scrapers, choppers, projectile points, and large blades. Our
Topanga series of scrapers and planes was numerically large enough and
exemplified a sufficient degree of internal variation to warrant a
breakdown into descriptive categories or types. Ground- and pecked-stone
pieces consisted mainly of manos and metates. Here too, quantity and
diversity allowed a reduction to types. The cultural validity and
developmental implications of the typology presented are limited although
some such considerations were discussed. Specimens represented only
sparingly, as was true with a number of forms of flaked tools, and
especially mortars, pestles, cogged stones, disks, and ornaments, have
been described individually. For additional details and for information
not included here the reader is referred to the earlier published report
(Treganza and Malamud, 1950).

On the basis of eight burials, all in poor condition, two modes of
interment were recognized: primary inhumation and reburial. Difficult to
characterize concisely are the various manifestations defined as
_features_. They include unusual aggregates of stone and/or implements,
hearths, or any circumstance that appeared atypical of the relatively
homogeneous midden deposit as it was understood in 1947.

A physical analysis of the mound mass and its contents indicates a
considerable degree of antiquity for the occupation represented. The
midden material is extremely compact, and there is a suggested development
of a soil profile. With the exception of fragmentary, occasional bits of
shell, charcoal, bone, and a trace of ashaltum, all organic substances
have long since disappeared from the site. What little mammal bone
remained was almost inevitably in a poor state of preservation, generally
fragmentary, and considerably decomposed. Marine shell, crushed and
friable, was encountered in occasional pockets in the lower limits of the
deposit and under inverted metates. This shell probably represents
evidence of the occasional use of shellfish as a dietary item. No shell
artifacts were found below 6 inches and all shell refuse was found below
48 inches. The few artifacts as were found in the upper levels were only
in a fair state of preservation and can probably be assigned to Phase II
occupation.

As our primary interest was in the Tank Site, and our time limited,
archaeological reconnaissance in the vicinity was necessarily curtailed.
Four lesser sites yielding core tools, and manos were noted along the
small tributary system on which the Tank Site is located. One of these,
LAn-2, was test-pitted. An additional site, LAn-6, typified by
"Topanga-like" artifacts, was recorded on the western periphery of the San
Fernando Valley just over the divide from Topanga Canyon.




LOCATION AND DESCRIPTION OF SITES


The prefix and numbers used in this paper to designate archaeological
deposits will follow the system now being used by the University of
California Archaeological Survey. All data on sites are filed in the
central office of the Survey, Department of Anthropology, University of
California, Berkeley. In this paper, LAn stands for Los Angeles County.

_LAn-1 (Tank Site)._--Our type locality, the Tank Site, occupies a
well-drained knoll high up on the eastern side of Topanga Canyon
(elevation 1,214 feet) some 4 miles inland from the Pacific Coast. The
tract of land upon which the site lies is known locally as the "92 acres"
(See Treganza and Malamud, 1950; and maps 1 and 2).

_LAn-2 (map 3)._--This site lies on the "92 acres," about 350 yards
west-southwest of the Tank Site, on the same ridge but at a lower
elevation. At this point the ridge narrows almost to a hogback about 75
feet wide, terminating in a small knoll. There were signs of occupation
for a distance of 300 feet along the ridge. The exact limits could not be
determined since the vegetation had been bulldozed off earlier and the
deposit had been dragged. Excavation at this site established the basis of
Topanga Culture Phase 11.

_LAn-3._--This site is located on the Trippet Ranch just within the city
limits of Los Angeles. It occupies the same ridge as the Tank Site but
lies at a higher elevation and some 450 yards to the east. The western
edge of the site and the nearby canyon are covered with live oaks, sage,
and manzanita. Most of the surface has been disturbed, for the land was
formerly planted to grain. The limits of habitation are marked by compact
light-brown soil, which discolors slightly the yellow surrounding earth.
There is no perceptible rise in contour. Artifacts typical of the Tank
Site were observed weathered out of the occupation surface. The former
living area was estimated about a hundred square yards. The deposit
appeared only a few inches deep; however, this was probably a village
site, though occupied only for a short time. An abundance of tarweed,
restricted to the deposit area, might well be considered a vegetation
association.

_LAn-4._--This site is located in the saddle of the ridge which separates
the Topanga Canyon drainage from that of the Santa Ynez Canyon, about
one-half mile east-southeast of the Tank Site. The saddle is well covered
with live oaks and manzanita. The habitation deposit is marked by a slight
discoloration of the soil and yielded a few manos like those of the Tank
Site. At best, the site was probably just a temporary camping spot.

_LAn-5._--As at LAn-4, the evidence of occupation, consisting of typical
manos, was found in a small saddle of a ridge directly across the ravine
from, and about one-half mile south of the Tank Site. Large live oaks
are the predominant vegetation. No extensive habitation area was noted,
though the evidence might well have been hidden under leaf mould.

[Illustration: Topanga Canyon]

_LAn-6._--This site is of interest since it may indicate an occurrence of
the Topanga Culture in the San Fernando Valley. The deposit is located on
the periphery of a citrus grove in the eastern foothills of the valley,
near Girard. Cultural associations consisted of Topanga-like scrapers and
choppers composed of a tough, light-colored rhyolite. There were no signs
of occupation. It is not improbable that this was a quarry site; an
outcrop of rhyolite is close at hand. However, no quantities of reject
refuse were noted; nor did any core or flake tools composed of rhyolite
occur in the Tank Site series to suggest trade or contact between the two
sites.

The two San Fernando Valley sites, the Big Tahunga and Porter Ranch sites,
reported on by Mr. Edwin Walker (Walker, 1936, 1945) of the Southwest
Museum, appear to have no relation to LAn-6 or bearing on the problem of
the Topanga Culture.

_LAn-8._--Topanga Post Office and a number of smaller buildings now stand
directly on this site, though parts of it are still evident where it
extends south to the highway. Except in the dry summer, water is available
in the creek just across the road and there are two springs less than half
a mile to the west.

The low mound has been badly cut through by latterday road and building
operations, thus an area of only about 200 square feet remains uncovered.
Even here the surface has been considerably disturbed, but, at the same
time, a large number of artifacts have been exposed and are to be found
scattered over the dark, friable midden soil, interspersed with rejects
and shell fragments. The artifacts noted consist of general core tools and
a possible mano fragment. One shell disk bead (diameter, 3 mm.; thickness,
1 mm.; diameter of perforation, 1 mm.; unidentifiable shell) was
collected.

_LAn-9._--Located on a small rocky knoll, formed by a spur descending from
the range on the west side of the canyon, the site is .5 (unless
specified, all mileages noted are in air miles) of a mile northwest of
LAn-8 and .3 of a mile due south of the ranch house of R. Kiewit. Water is
available at a spring, .25 of a mile northwest, rising from the bed of an
intermittent creek that drains into Topanga Creek.

In appearance the site is very different from LAn-8. The mound soil has
been consolidated to a near-clay, so that it varies only from the
surrounding clayey soil in being somewhat darker. It extends over an area
of 100 square feet, but few artifacts are evident on the surface. Those
collected consist of 8 single-edged scraper planes and 1 bifacial chopper.
Of the planes, 2 were additionally utilized as choppers on the edge
opposite that which had been worked. All artifacts were basalt with the
exception of 2 quartzite planes. Patination was evident on all the basalt
specimens, though not as heavy as on similar implements from a number of
the other sites.

_LAn-10._--This site is situated on the adjoining ridge, only .13 of a
mile northwest of LAn-9 and is correspondingly closer to the spring, which
from here is due north. Both in physiographic location and appearance the
two sites are very similar.

The area covered by mound soil stretches along the ridge some 250 feet and
is 70 feet wide. But the soil is compact and consolidated and only
slightly dark. A portion of the site area has been somewhat disturbed by
the construction of a milk house, stockyard, and fences. Artifacts picked
up from the surface consist of manos, choppers, scraper planes, and
hammerstones. Of the manos, 5 are bifacial--3 with parallel wear surfaces,
2 wedge-shaped in cross section--and of these, 2 are trifacial, with the
two sides that form the keeled back meeting at right angles. In cross
section, all the used areas are only slightly convex. Most show
considerable wear and good shoulder development, display pecking on their
grinding surfaces, and all but 2 granitic specimens are of sandstone. A
single monofacial chopper of basalt is well battered along its edge. Out
of 7 single-edged planes, 2 have been secondarily worked and used as
choppers on an edge other than that developed on the periphery of the
plane, and 6 are basalt and 1 is quartzite. One small, flat scraper has
two localized adjacent concavities struck from its margin and is also of
basalt. Of the 3 core hammerstones, 2 are basalt and 1 is quartzite.
Considerable chemical alteration is obvious on even the flaked surfaces.

_LAn-11._--Located in the vineyard of the Kiewit Ranch, this site is less
than .2 of a mile west of north from LAn-10. The spring already mentioned
is immediately to the east, and another, on the property of S. Barton, is
.3 of a mile north-northeast.

This site has much in common with LAn-9 and LAn-10. The sloping knoll on
which the site is situated is part of the ridge that forms the north bank
of the intermittent creek. The leeched, indurated soil is hardly
recognizable as occupational deposit, but the fact that it forms a site is
obvious from its slightly darker coloring and the scattered surface
artifacts and reject material. These are thinly strewn over an area of 200
feet by 100 feet, and are found to a depth of 2 feet in the bank resulting
from a road cut at the base of the site.

The 10 single-edged planes that come from the surface range from large to
small, 9 of which are basalt and 1 a pink mudstone. A single massive
double-ended plane of basalt is much battered on its worked edges, which
are flaked back on their upper side. Battering is also in evidence along
the flaked edge of 4 bifacial choppers, 3 of which are basalt and 1
quartzite. Out of 4 basalt flake scrapers, one has been much used; and of
4 core hammerstones, 2 are basalt, 1 is quartzite, and 1 is mudstone.
Manos were represented by 3 bifacial types, the grinding surfaces of 2
being parallel, and 1 meeting at an angle to effect a wedge-shaped cross
section. All are well-shouldered, 1 displaying a pecked depression on a
single wear surface; 2 are of sandstone, 1 of which is carbonized; and the
third is of an igneous rock. Again, on all the basalt specimens the
patination is very marked.

_LAn-12._--The largest site yet found in the canyon is on the property of
Mr. Miller on the road to the Trippet Ranch, .25 of a mile southeast of
the Tank Site across an intermittent creek. It was noted that in the creek
bed, just downstream from the Miller residence, pools of water, which,
according to Mr. Trujillo were spring fed, an exceptionally dry summer
season.

The site extends from the ridge where the house is located into the knoll
west of the orchard, covering an area of 400 by 300 feet to a depth of at
least 30 inches. Artifacts are plentiful on the ploughed and cultivated
surface, and the highly indurated mound soil is dark and clayey. Where the
deposit has been cut by recent developments, little worked stone is found
in the banks; and a 5-foot square pit netted only one fragment of a ground
slate pendant, though the deposit extended below the 30 inches to which
the excavation proceeded. From the walls of the pit it could be noted that
some soil profile had already developed.

Tools from the surface included general core tools, manos, and metates. A
basin metate had been reported; and a fragment of one, of sandstone and
shaped on its outer surface, was found. Of 9 manos and mano fragments, 5
are bifacial and relatively thin and 4, monofacial. All but 2 of the
monofacial artifacts are sandstone, these being of a granitic rock. In
cross section the majority of grinding surfaces are unusually convex,
especially as they reach the edge and roll partly up the side. A single
basalt pestle fragment was obtained. Scraper planes are well represented
by 10 with a U-shaped edge development, some well-battered along the
worked margin; and 25 single-edged planes, some of which are very large
and most displaying flaking back on their edges, generally on the upper
surface of the used edge. Four of quartzite and 1 of felsite porphyry are
single-edged, the remainder are basalt. The 4 side scrapers are thin
flakes, 2 of basalt, 2 of chert. The 3 choppers are of basalt, 1 having
served additional use as a hammerstone, and the 4 hammerstones are basalt
cores. Patination is noticeable on all, and smoothed flake scars are not
uncommon.

_LAn-13._--Six bedrock mortars were found here in a sandstone outcrop of
the south bank of the creek, 200 feet upstream from the Kiewit Ranch. As
the area is covered by a relatively dense oak grove, the fact that no
artifacts were found on the surface in the vicinity may be due in part to
the thick fall of dead leaves. However, the soil here beneath the leaf
mold is no different from that of the region as a whole, being of a
light-colored clayey consistency.

_LAn-14._--Three-tenths of a mile northeast of Mineral Springs is a basalt
quarry and possible habitation site. The spring water is potable and
affords the nearest available water source. Over an area of 100 by 75
feet, surrounding the basalt outcrop, the sandy soil is somewhat darker.
Whether this is owing to the decomposition of organic refuse strewn about
a habitation site or merely to rock weathering, or in part to both, was
indeterminable. The only evidence of former activity are several
percussion bulbs and a number of specimens displaying a small amount of
regular chipping, which suggest crude scrapers. All of these pieces,
moreover, have undergone considerable patination so that they are now
quite yellowed even on their flaked surfaces. In general appearance and
degree of patination the artifacts from this site show marked resemblance
to those from San Fernando, LAn-6, just over the divide.

Four-tenths of a mile to the south, .2 of a mile southwest of the home of
M. Biencourt, an isolated chopper was picked from the surface of a spur
ridge leading to Garrapata Creek. It is a large bifacial tool, battered on
the slightly fashioned working edge, of basalt and patinated. No further
indication of aboriginal habitation could be discovered in the near
vicinity. Lithic tools and rejects, however, were found on the slope just
southeast of the Biencourt residence, apparently weathering from a higher
source. Investigation at the time was not feasible, however, and further
investigation has not as yet been possible.

_LAn-16._--Now almost completely destroyed or disturbed by bulldozing and
animals, this site is centered in the chicken run of the W. R. Hamilton
Ranch, some 3 miles up the Fernwood-Pacific Road, 1.7 air miles southwest
of Topanga Post Office. It sits on a somewhat more level shelf of an
otherwise steep slope, the east bank of a ravine from which a permanent
spring emanates 12 miles from the site. Over an area 60 feet in diameter,
dark friable mound soil is still in evidence, though artifacts are now
scarce. Three deep bedrock mortars, and some seven smaller, have been
worn into a sandstone outcrop toward the upper end of the site, and a
single pestle, and scraper plane of quartzite, came from the surface.

_LAn-17._--LAn-17 surrounds the spring on the Barton School property to an
indeterminable extent. Recent building and cultivation have obliterated or
disturbed considerable portions of the old habitation site; however, from
what remains, it appears very similar to LAn-8, .3 of a mile southeast.
Artifacts lie on the surface of the dark, friable midden deposit, which
contrasts with the surrounding light clayey soil, though the discoloration
may have been intensified to some extent by seepage and decay of organic
matter derived from the heavy oak grove. The artifacts noted consist of a
shallow basin metate, manos, only a few general core tools, and a bedrock
mortar in a boulder, some 300 feet from the spring.

_LA-21 and LAn-21._--Located on a level shelf adjacent to the west bank of
Garapata Creek, the site is .72 of a mile east-northeast of Mineral
Springs. The upper half is separated from the lower by a 4-foot sandstone
face that divides the site midway between the bank and its upper
extremity. In all, an area of 50 feet by 75 feet is covered with dark,
friable, sandy midden deposit to an undetermined depth, which contrasts
with the surrounding light, brown-colored sand. Surface finds included
only some scrapers, and a quartz core hammerstone, along with a few cores
and more concentrated chert flakes; by far in the majority were
head-fractured, carbonized rock fragments. A shallow 10-foot test trench
again yielded only fired, fractured rock.

A number of springs are located in this vicinity, all, at present,
permanent and potable. Two are within a quarter of a mile, one upstream
and one downstream. Two others are within a three-quarter mile radius, one
upstream on the old Santa Maria Ranch, and the other at Mineral Springs,
to the west across a low range.

_LAn-23._--This site is on the east side of Garrapata Creek located in a
small cave near the top of a large sandstone outcrop. The habitation
deposit consists of loose, ashy dark soil charged with clam and abalone
shells, and mammal and bird bones. Artifacts recovered were typical of the
late protohistoric period. This site was partly examined by R. F. Heizer
in 1946 and called by him "Cave 1" (Heizer and Lemert, 1947, p. 238).

_LAn-24._--This site is in the open adjacent to LAn-23. It consists of a
refuse deposit some 75 square yards in area. Surface and subsurface
artifacts resemble those of Topanga Phase II. This was Heizer's "Upper
Site" (Heizer and Lemert, 1947, p. 238).

_LAn-25._--A cave site, LAn-25 is .4 of a mile east of LAn-23 in the same
sandstone ridge. It has a northwest exposure and is very near the top of
the outcrop. A small opening leads into a circular room 15 feet in
diameter; the walls and ceiling are somewhat smoke-blackened. However, the
cave probably bore little habitation, for the floor deposit is hardly
discolored and includes very little charcoal, only two flakes and no
artifacts. Water is available at the Santa Maria spring a half a mile
north, but the ascent to the cave is difficult because of the thick brush
and sheer rock faces.

_LAn-27._--This is one of a series of caves reported by W. King and D.
Lathrop. They stretch along the north bank of Garrapata Creek for .25 of a
mile on the property of M. Biencourt, just south of the owner's house, all
with a more or less southerly exposure. Water is available from the spring
in the creek bed a few hundred feet upstream and from Mineral Springs,
less than a half a mile to the west. As none contain deposit of any depth,
and the majority are relatively low overhangs, these caves probably
served only as temporary shelters.

_LAn-27._--This is a high-roofed cave, 25 feet wide and 12 feet deep, with
a maximum floor deposit of 12 inches. The slope in the front of the cave
also bears dark, loose deposit, which appears to have a greater depth than
that in the cave itself. Surface finds include a few scrapers, as well as
some flakes and marine shell fragments.

_LAn-28._--100 feet west of LAn-27, and slightly higher, is another cave,
only 8 by 5 feet. The rock floor bears no artifacts, the only evidence of
possible habitation being the intensely fire-blackened roof. As extensive
brush fires are not uncommon in this region the blackening may well be the
result of unintentional firing.

_LAn-29._--This is the largest of the caves, 60 by 16 feet, and is 400
feet southwest of LAn-27 and somewhat lower. A thin erosional or aelian
layer covers the surface of the deposit, which bears scrapers, marine
shell fragments, and burnt bone; the interior of the cave is completely
carbonized.

_LAn-30._--Only 30 feet southwest of LAn-29 is another small cave, 20 by
10 feet, with fire-blackened walls and shallow deposit containing
scrapers, marine shell, and flakes.

_LAn-31._--This is a low circular cave with two entrances, some 80 feet
southwest of LAn-30. The dark ashy deposit covers a floor 10 by 15 feet
where pockets attain a maximum depth of 24 inches, and extends some 20
feet beyond the cave mouth. Aside from marine shell and flakes, it
contained a few cores and scrapers.

_LAn-32._--The last of the caves is 200 feet west of LAn-31 and slightly
lower. Here a long shallow overhang leads to a dry circular room with
blackened walls. The deposit covers an area 15 feet in diameter, is dark,
ashy, and dry, and yielded a few scrapers, some cores, and a quantity of
marine shell fragments.

_LAn-33._--In a sandstone cliff overlooking the valley, 3 potholes have
been used as bedrock mortars. They are .25 of a mile west-southwest of the
spring on the Barton School property, and the same distance west-northwest
of the spring on the Kiewit Ranch, surrounded on the west by oaks. Again,
neither surface artifacts nor other habitation deposits are evident in the
immediate vicinity.


SUMMARY OF SITES

On the basis of physiographic location, nature of deposit, artifact types,
and the degree of implement patination, sites LAn-2, 3, 4, 5, 9, 10, 11,
12, 14, and 24 resemble the Tank Site and, therefore, could probably be
classed as representative of one of the phase developments of the Topanga
Culture. Sites LAn-8, 20, 21, 22, 23, 27, 28, 29, 30, 31, and 32, because
of the friable, dark soil, presence of steatite, quantities of mammal bone
and mollusk shell, or associated bedrock mortars, have been classed as
late protohistoric sites and are not considered within the scope of this
paper. Several sites, e.g., LAn-17, were of dubious mixed origin and would
require more extensive examination to determine their cultural affinities.
Where omissions in the numbering occur, e.g., 7, it is because sites were
reported for an area and later failed to materialize as much.




FIELD TECHNIQUES


Our major purpose in continuing field work at the Tank Site was to
establish with greater certainty the relationships between the diverse
artifact types and classes, and other manifestations, already recognized.
In the hope that the general region in which burials had been located in
1947 would continue to be productive in this respect, we expanded from
there in all directions, especially toward the center of the mound.
Digging in the deeper northwestern part of the site was furthered with the
intent of verifying the suggested stratigraphy and acquiring, possibly, a
deep undisturbed burial in better condition than those from the upper soil
horizons.

The procedure of excavation and notation was essentially unaltered from
that previously employed. A grid of coördinates had already been
established with reference to permanent data. Burials and features were
again entered on standard University of California archaeological forms. A
slight change, however, was made in the method of recording and
cataloguing field data.

Originally a data sheet had been completed for each 6-inch interval of a
5-foot grid section, on which artifacts were plotted in exact horizontal
location. In working up the material it became clear that the specific
spatial distribution of isolated implements lacked patterning. It was
therefore considered adequate, when returning to the field, to designate
provenience by excavation unit and level only. In addition, the method of
cataloguing was simplified and so organized that 90 per cent of the
tabulation of data could be completed in the field. This was possible
because the specimens derived from the 1947 field work had already been
classified and constituted a sample on which expectations could
reasonably be based.

The procedure followed was to strip each 5-foot section in 6-inch levels,
and to sack together all the artifacts from one such test unit. At the end
of the day the level bags were taken to camp where the artifacts were
washed, labeled, and tabulated. All items were marked in India ink
according to section number and level interval, e.g., 15R10-1, a specimen
from the 0- to 6-inch level of the pit; 15R10-2 would indicate the 6- to
12-inch level, etc. A tabulation sheet was kept for each excavation unit.
This sheet listed the most frequently occuring types or categories,
allowing for the notation of rare forms, and was ruled vertically to
indicate depth intervals. Artifacts were entered according to type, or
category, and level, and then packed for transport. Atypical specimens or
those to be used for illustration were set aside for separate shipment and
more intensive examination.

This system had many advantages. Records were readily kept up to date,
problems that suggested themselves as excavation progressed could be more
closely defined and investigated, and artifacts could be expeditiously and
finally cleared from the work area. The data sheets served as a field
catalogue and covered the groundwork of the final statistical compilation.
The number assigned each specimen referred not only to its catalogue entry
but also its provenience.

In 1947 we could not anticipate what might be found, nor could we
establish immediately the significance of what we did encounter. Thus it
has been our policy to save all worked stone and ship it back to the
Museum of Anthropology at Berkeley for study. During the second season,
however, we felt a little more discrimination was warranted in order to
save the museum valuable storage space. Therefore, the bulk of the
hammerstones and a number of complete, and all fragmentary, manos,
metates, and scrapers were tabulated and piled into pit 21R4 before
backfilling.

[Illustration: Map 2. Tank Site LAn-1]




FEATURES


Since the Tank Site showed promise of being an unusual and important
deposit, considerable care was observed during both seasons of excavation
to isolate and expose any concentration of lithic remains which appeared
to be in any way atypical of the average mound matrix. As a result,
numerous associations of stones, such as mano caches, highly weathered
inverted metates, and massive piles of rejected cores, broken manos and
metates, and plain cobbles, were set apart from the rest of the site and
given the term "feature." In some instances these features possess obvious
meaning, as was true of the mano caches and the inverted metates, but in
other instances the purpose remains unknown. If nothing else, this
technique of isolating features as excavation progressed provided an
adequate view of the internal structure of a village, a type of
information largely lacking in southern California archaeology.

The features described below represent a continuation of the series
reported for 1947.

_Feature 14 (pl. 19, b)._--Cache of 4 manos. The placement of these
specimens precludes a chance affinity; they were closely grouped and each
was standing more or less on end. No other artifacts were found in
association.

_Feature 15 (pl. 19, d)._--Owing to its areal extent, feature 15 is
somewhat difficult to define. The complex of stone by which it is
characterized has been arbitrarily broken down for descriptive
convenience. There is no way of knowing whether the entire complex
exemplifies a single unit or if in the course of time it merely developed
from a single point of departure.

_Feature 15a._--This was 10 by 10 feet with an average depth of 4 to 8
inches. Four inverted metates, additional metate fragments, manos, core
tools, and a single fragment of a slate pendant. In the southeast portion
were 12 symmetrical stream cobbles of different sizes. This latter
aggregation is of interest. The almost perfect symmetry of the stones
suggests selection, and the physiographic location of the Tank Site
implies such stones must have been transported to it. None shows any
evidence of utilitarian use, and in the light of present knowledge the
existence and function of such objects cannot be explained.

_Feature 15b._--Badly weathered, fragmentary metates; altered "lumps" of
sandstone; manos; and core tools. Three small pestles were found near
association.

_Feature 15c._--Inverted, killed, sandstone metate; sandstone slab; and
core tools. Burial 11 was in close proximity, but owing to its badly
disturbed condition, no positive association could be made with the
feature.

_Feature 15d._--Metates; altered sandstone blocks; core tools; manos; and
fragments of human leg bones.

_Feature 16._--Disintegrated, pitted metate and fragments of 2 other
metates; mano fragments; core tools; unworked stone; and unidentifiable
fragments of human bone.

_Feature 17._--Characterized by a number of symmetrically water-worn
cobbles. Contrasts with other features wherein metates, manos, cores, and
irregular, unutilized stones predominate. Fragmentary metates, manos, and
core tools were also present, as were 2 segments of human femora.

_Feature 18._--Badly weathered, inverted, deep-basin metate in near
association to symmetrical sandstone cobble containing a ground
depression. The latter may represent the initial stage of mortar
manufacture, though the smoothness and regularity of the depression
surface somewhat invalidates the idea.

_Feature 19._--Metates (deep basin, shallow basin, and slab); mano
fragments; scraper planes; core hammerstones; and fragments of human
femora and tibiae. The deep-basin metate was right side up, in contrast to
the usual inversion.

_Feature 20._--Deep-basin metate with associated metate fragments;
carbon-smudged blocks of disintegrated sandstone core tools; and sections
of human femora.

_Feature 21 (pl. 18, b)._--Large, shallow-basin metate and fragments of 2
others; 2 large, reworked, granite boulders; 3 blocks of highly decomposed
sandstone; core tools; mano; and fragments of human femur.

_Feature 22 (pl. 20, b)._--Deep-basin metate; 2 slab metates and 3 metate
fragments; chunks of altered sandstone; core tools; and a large, chert
blade.

_Feature 23 (pl. 20, d)._--This feature constituted by far the largest
single concentration of stone, being about 8 feet in diameter. In addition
to quantities of unworked pieces of granite and sandstone, the following
artifacts were noted: 53 metate fragments (31 deep basin, 13 shallow
basin, and 9 slab), 15 manos, 11 scraper planes, 4 side scrapers, 5
bifaced chopper, and 2 abrading stones.

_Feature 24 (pl. 18, d)._--Large, decomposed fragments of fired sandstone
(18 × 12 × 11 inches); 2 metate fragments; core tools; and fragments of
human long bones.

_Feature 25 (pl. 19, a)._--Cache of 6 manos.

_Feature 26 (pl. 20, a)._--One slab metate; metate fragments; manos; core
tools; and limonite pigment.

_Feature 27._--Killed, inverted, deep-basin metate; slab metate; 2 scraper
planes; 1 mano; 6 core hammerstones; 1 cobble hammerstone; 1 bifaced
chopper; fossil mammal bone; and fragments of human bones.

_Feature 28 (pl. 20, c)._--Killed, inverted, shallow-basin metate;
fragments of 2 slab metates; 1 shallow-basin type; 4 mano fragments; and 2
core hammerstones. This feature is of interest due to its very shallow
depth (4 inches to top of metate). No disturbance could be detected,
indicating either that when Mr. Trujillo plowed the site (1920) his plow
was drawing less than 4 inches or the deposit has undergone some
degradation since the time of his activity.

_Feature 29._--Inverted, deep-basin metate; hammerstone; granules of red
ocher; and fragments of human long bones.

_Feature 30._--Single, inverted, shallow-basin metate.

_Feature 31._--Inverted, deep-basin metate; 9 complete manos and 3
fragments; 2 scraper planes; 6 core hammerstones; 7 chunks of altered
sandstone; and fragments of human leg bones.

_Feature 32._--Fragments of highly altered metates and 3 chunks of burned
sandstone. Unknowingly, a section of this feature was moved during our
1947 operations.




BURIALS


The number of burials recovered was disappointing in view of the previous
summer's find. In 1947 our efforts had been confined to digging a wide
L-shaped trench peripheral to the central section of the site, from which
six fully extended burials were removed, as well as a disturbed burial and
reburial. Considering this a favorable sample, we anticipated the central
region at least to be as productive. It proved, on the contrary, to be
almost lacking in burials. The few interments we did expose came, again,
from the peripheral sectors. This peripheral occurrence of burials
suggests the possibility of marginal cemeteries rather than burial plots
in the central living area, a feature often characteristic of later
cultures.

More apparent from the field notes than in the course of excavation was
the repeated occurrence of fragmented sets of long bones still in
semiarticulated position. (See features 15_d_, 15_c_, 16, 17, 19, 20, 24,
27, 29, and 31.) The nonarticulated epiphesial extremities were generally
lacking. In some instances sections of both femora and tibiae occurred in
articulated position; in others, just a pair of tibiae or femora, or a
single femur or tibia were left. Burial 1 (Treganza and Malamud, 1950, p.
134; pl. 15, _a_) constitutes a good example of the condition to which we
just referred. Earlier, on the basis of merely this isolated example, we
assumed it to be simply the remains of a disturbed extended burial.
However, the frequent recurrence of the phenomenon this season suggests a
distinct and intentional burial pattern. Often, the segmented long bones
were encountered in conjunction with those features composed of a
concentration of large unworked stone and metate fragments. Some problem
exists as to what happened to the rest of the skeleton. At no time during
excavation did we uncover scattered skull fragments or teeth, and
fragmentary arm bones or other skeletal parts were rare. The bulk of the
dissociated bone consisted of tibiae or femora. Until otherwise indicated,
therefore, we are led to assume that the manifestation results from some
form of sectional body disposal, though its ramifications remain unknown
and precisely comparable situations are unreported in terms of a
consistant pattern.

The data from the two seasons' work thus demonstrate three methods for
disposal of the dead: (1) primary inhumation in the flesh, the
disposition of the corpse being extended, either prone or supine, with
head oriented southerly; (2) reburial, involving only incomplete skeletal
remains, primarily segments of long bones, and covered by a metate, which
is generally inverted; (3) fractional burial, with interment of leg bones
only. The latter is a tentative form, and should it in reality have
existed we are unable to explain such a unique custom that would have
involved body dissection. The nature of the finds, however, suggests
burial of the dismembered lower extremities and not merely a reburial,
hence probably representing a form of primary inhumation.


_Burial 9_[1]

Location: section 22L2.

Depth: 50 in.

Type: fractional burial.

Condition: fair.

Position: indeterminable.

Sex: indeterminable.

Remarks: Partial burial consisting of sections of leg bones. Owing to the
depth, preservation of the existing bone was good. Unfortunately, because
of a cave-in of the unconsolidated earth of last year's fill, a photograph
was impossible.

Artifacts in association: larger part of deep-basin metate. In contrast to
other metates associated with reburials, this specimen was not inverted.

    [1] Burials 1-8 described in Treganza and Malamud, 1950, pp. 134-135.


_Burial 10_

(Pl. 17, _e_)

Location: section 16R11.

Depth: 24 in.

Type: fractional burial.

Condition: poor.

Position: ?

Sex: ?

Remarks: Double burial involving only the leg bones. In one burial the
greater part of both femora was present. The original burial position
could have been either flexed or extended, i.e., if the corpse has been
interred _in toto_ in the first place. In the second burial most of the
two tibiae and parts of both femora remained, their position strongly
suggesting flexure. It is impossible to say to what extent the burials
were disturbed, or what happened to the rest of the bodies.

Artifacts in association: none.


  Table 1

  Burials LAn-1

  =========================================================================
                          |                  Burial number
          Burial data     |------------------------------------------------
                          |  1   2   3   4   5   6   7   8   9  10  11  12
  ------------------------|------------------------------------------------
  Depth from surface      |
    (inches)              | 12  19  18  19  13   7   6  30  50  24  12  26
  Primary inhumation      | ...  x   x   x   x   x  ... ... ... ...  ?   ?
  Reburial                | ... ... ... ... ... ...  x   x   x  ...  ?   ?
  Fractional burial       |  x  ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...  x  ... ...
  Extended on ventral side| ... ... ...  x  ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
  Flexed                  | ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...  ?  ... ...
  Head oriented           | ...  s  ssw  s   s   s  ... ... ... ... ... ...
  Artifacts associated    | ... ...  x   x   x   x   x   x   x  ... ... ...
  -------------------------------------------------------------------------


_Burial 11_

(Pl. 18, _a_)

Location: section 15R13.

Depth: 12 in.

Type: partial reburial or disturbed primary burial.

Condition: poor.

Position: indeterminable.

Sex: indeterminable.

Remarks: Fragments of long bones, mandible, and maxilla present. Position
of mandible and maxilla among the leg bones suggests either a former
disturbance of a primary inhumation or a secondary burial.

Artifacts in association: possible feature 15C and a cogged stone found
about 18 inches away.


_Burial 12_

Location: section 17R7.

Depth: 26 in.

Type: indeterminable.

Condition: poor.

Position: indeterminable.

Sex: indeterminable.

Remarks: Bone disintegration and what seemed to have been disturbance
obviated taking adequate information.

Artifacts in association: none.




DESCRIPTION OF ARTIFACTS


To avoid repetition of description, only those types or groups of
specimens not covered in the earlier report will be fully discussed here.
Such categories as have already been isolated and defined will be treated
in summary fashion. For complete descriptive data, the 1947 account of the
Topanga Culture should be consulted. The total tabulations of the major
groups of artifacts derived from both season's excavations will be
presented in this paper.

The artifacts from LAn-2 constitute a problem of their own and will be
described in a later section of this paper covering the excavation of that
site.


FLAKED TOOLS

With few exceptions, the additional flaked tools represent roughly the
same sample as already revealed. Concave scrapers, thumbnail scrapers, a
crescentic stone, and new projectile point types make up the adjunct to
the typology. The frequencies for most of the groups of flaked tools are
reasonably higher than was heretofore indicated. This is probably the
result of the more extensive excavations carried out in the areas of
greatest artifact concentration.

[Illustration: Figure 1. Location of Features and Burials]


_Scraper Planes_

Numerically, scraper planes as an entire class constitute the largest
single stylized group of artifacts from the Tank Site. Some forms display
a marked perfection in flaking technique, and are comparable to
illustrated specimens from the San Dieguito industry (M. J. Rogers, 1929;
1939, pl. 8, _i-j_) on the southern California coast and in the Lake
Mohave Culture (Campbell _et al._, pls. XXVI, XXVII) in the eastern
desert. The majority, however, exhibit only generalized characteristics
with considerable latitude in external form suggesting that their
manufacture required little precision on the part of the maker, and
probably, also, they served essentially as an all-purpose tool. The nature
of the wear on much-used specimens indicated hard usage, such as would
result from repeated contact on an unyielding surface.

Figure 2 illustrates "ideal" scraper-plane types and the following
description is a brief summary of the recognized forms. (For photographs,
see Treganza and Malamud, 1950, pls. 17-19.)

_Type IA_

Round to oval in outline, flat base chipped about the entire perimeter.
Top surface flaked to a near symmetrical dome shape.

_Type IB_

Like IA, except that the upper surface rises to a peak or ridge somewhat
off-center.

_Type IC_

Like IA, but higher and with more latitude in form. Flakes are struck from
the perimeter at a steep angle so that on most specimens height exceeds
diameter.

_Type IIA_

Form is variable, but tends toward subrectangular. About three-quarters of
the basal margin evidences flaking, the remaining portion consists of an
unretouched straight edge caused by the removal of a large primary flake.

_Type IIB_

Like IIA, except that the worked edges display a marked degree of
secondary flaking or resharpening, to the point where sections of the
steepened sides are notably undercut.

_Type III_

Distinct from other forms in that they are shaped from angular rocks on
which two separate working faces have been developed. In other respects
the specimens in this category fall essentially into the IIA class.


  Table 2

  Frequency of Scraper Planes by Depth

  =========================================================================
          |                     Depth (in in.)                       |
          |----------------------------------------------------------|
  Type    |0-6  6-12 12-18 18-24 24-30 30-36 36-42 42-48 48-54 54-60 |Total
  -------------------------------------------------------------------------
    IA    | 22   21    16     9     6     4     1     1   ...   ...  |   80
    IB    | 11    6     5     8     3     2     1   ...   ...   ...  |   36
    IC    | 34   52    28    17    14     7     2     1   ...   ...  |  155
   IIA    |356  472   385   187    88    43    23    12     2     2  |1,570
   IIB    | 12    7    10     4     1   ...   ...     2   ...   ...  |   36
  III     | 29   43    21    17     7     9     3     1     1   ...  |  131
  -------------------------------------------------------------------------
  Total by|                                                          |
    level |464  601   465   242   119    65    30    17     3     2  |2,008
  -------------------------------------------------------------------------


_Scrapers._

_Side scrapers (fig. 3, d-e)._--Ovoid to angular, with convex working
edges. Frequently with scalloped working edges.

_Straight-edge scrapers or knives (fig. 3, f)._--Irregular forms with a
single straight, monofacial retouched margin along one side.

_Ovoid or discoidal scrapers (fig. 3, a)._--Made from large flat flakes,
often showing a percussion bulb on one surface, and worked to a
near-symmetrical form. Chipping may extend over the whole of one or both
faces.

_End scrapers (Treganza and Malamud, 1950, pl. 20, k-l)._--Subrectangular
in outline with one of the narrow ends flaked back to a low angle.

_Snub-nosed scrapers (ibid., pl. 20, f-g)._--Like end scrapers with the
exception that the flakes have been removed from the retouched end at a
much steeper angle, producing a blunter but stronger working edge.

_Cobble scrapers (ibid., pl. 20, c)._--Made from a split cobble showing
wear along the sharp curved margin. Only slight retouching.

_Flake scrapers or knives (fig. 3, g)._--Thin flakes monofacially flaked
along portions of their peripheries.

_Concave scrapers (fig. 3, c)._--These are neither common nor are they
clearly stylized. They total only nine, all acquired during the second
season. Though none are alike, they characteristically display a shallow
localized concavity along one edge. In some instances the margin of the
concavity shows signs of notable abrasion. Small chips have been sprung
from the base of the concavity probably through use. Sizes range from 6 to
10 cm. in diameter with the depressions varying from .5 to 2 cm. Seven
specimens were of basalt and one each of chert and porphyry.

[Illustration: Figure 2. Scraper Plane Types]

[Illustration: Figure 3. Scraper Types]

One specimen appears to have served a dual function as a tool. A portion
of one edge is concave and the remainder convex, as on a typical side
scraper. Both working margins display considerable wear.

Examples illustrated by Rogers (1939, pl. 8, _h_, _k_) for the desert
Playa industry differ in that they are consistently subrectangular,
elongated, and have a broader concave scraping edge along each of two
sides.

_Thumbnail scrapers (fig. 3, b)._--Only a single specimen falls in this
category. It is roughly circular in outline, thin, lenticular in cross
section, and flaked on both surfaces. The example made of a dark-brown
chert is 2 cm. in diameter and 4 mm. thick. The lone occurrence of this
type of tool would seem to indicate a lack of emphasis on light delicate
work. Implements of this nature are usually best associated with cultures
of later origin.


_Choppers_

_Unifaced choppers or heavy duty scrapers._--These are produced from large
cores of basalt or from a split cobble and exhibit flaking only on one
face. (Treganza and Malamud, 1950, pl. 20, _d-e_).

_Bifaced choppers._--These are large cores bifacially flaked along an edge
to effect a sharp, sinuous margin that may extend around the entire
periphery or only a portion of it (_ibid._, pl. 20, _a-b_).


_Crescentic Stone or "Amulet"_

This class is represented by but a half of a single specimen obtained
during the second season (pl. 21, _m_). Though this specimen varies
somewhat from illustrated examples there seems to be little doubt as to
its general classification. The function of these implements remains open
to question, and varient forms appear to have considerable latitude in
time and areal distribution in western United States. Similar forms may be
noted for the Lake Mohave Culture and the San Dieguito-Playa industry
(Campbell _et al._, 1937. pl. XXXVIII, _a-c_; M. J. Rogers, 1939, pl. 8,
_a-c_).


_Drill or Reamer_

(Pl. 23, _d-e_)

Two very similar pieces make up the addition to this class. Both are
elongated, tapering sections of rose quartzite on which the margins have
been retouched and the tip of each is notably abraded. The large ends show
no evidence of preparation for hafting, so presumably they were used as a
hand reamer or drill. The lengths are 6 cm. and 10 cm.


_Hand Pick_

The two new specimens, roughly triangular in outline, resemble the single
piece recovered in 1947. On both, the working end tapers to a heavy,
well-formed point, whereas the opposite end is bulbous and fits
comfortably into the palm of the hand. Lengths are 9.8 cm. and 13 cm.,
respectively, with basalt and quartzite as materials.


_Projectile Points_

Since projectile points as a general class have proved to be the best
criteria for establishing the stratigraphic differences whereby Topanga
Phase I and Phase II may be distinguished, and because projectile points,
to some measure, provide useful comparative data, it seems advisable to
illustrate all the complete and near-complete specimens collected during
both seasons.

With additional information some modification has been made over last
seasons presentation. Here are included two groups of projectile points,
each of which is associated with a definite phase of the Topanga Culture.
Phase I is characterized by large blades and large points, most of which
are composed of a highly patinated basalt and have been manufactured
through the percussion or rough pressure-flaking technique (pl. 21,
_a-l_). Phase II is characterized by small projectile points of the "dart"
class which in material range through slightly patinated basalt, glassy
basalt, obsidian, chalcedony, and chert. All have been finished in a rough
to medium pressure technique (pl. 22, _c-u_). Totally absent in either
phase is the light, thin, finely pressure-flaked "arrow point" of the
historic or protohistoric periods.


  Table 3

  Frequency of Flaked Artifacts by Depth

  =========================================================================
           |                     Depth (in in.)                      |
           |---------------------------------------------------------|
  Type     |0-6  6-12 12-18 18-24 24-30 30-36 36-42 42-48 48-54 54-60|Total
  ---------|---------------------------------------------------------|-----
  Side     |                                                         |
   scrapers|178  129    73    37    12     5     7     3     2     1 |  447
  Straight-|                                                         |
   edge    |                                                         |
   knives  | 75   42    42    19    12     3   ...     2     1   ... |  196
  Ovate    |                                                         |
   scrapers|  9   10     5     8     1     1     1   ...   ...   ... |   35
  End      |                                                         |
   scrapers| 11   14    10     8     2     4   ...   ...   ...   ... |   49
  Snub-nose|                                                         |
   scrapers|  8   15     6     1     2   ...   ...   ...   ...   ... |   32
  Flake    |                                                         |
   scrapers| 25   20    14     8     2     1     3   ...   ...   ... |   73
  Cobble   |                                                         |
   scrapers|  2    1     3   ...     1     1   ...   ...   ...   ... |    8
  Concave  |                                                         |
   scrapers|  3    3     2     1   ...   ...   ...   ...   ...   ... |    9
  Thumbnail|                                                         |
   scrapers|  1  ...   ...   ...   ...   ...   ...   ...   ...   ... |    1
  Unifaced |                                                         |
   choppers| 48   56    33    27    12     3     3     3   ...   ... |  185
  Bifaced  |                                                         |
   choppers|152  117   113    49    14     7     6     5     1   ... |  464
  Core     |                                                         |
   hammer- |                                                         |
   stones  |339  422   429   154    93    17    18     9     5     1 |1,478
  ---------|---------------------------------------------------------|-----
  Total by |                                                         |
    level  |851  829   730   312   151    42    38    22     9     2 |2,986
  -------------------------------------------------------------------------

In addition to the physical and technological differences between the
projectile points of Phase I and Phase II there remains important
stratigraphic differences that are clearly shown in table 4. The large
blades and points of Phase I are primarily confined to the lower levels of
the site with the deepest occurrence at the 54-to-60-inch level and a
maximum occurrence in the 12-to-18-inch level. Almost a complete reversal
of this may be observed in the distribution of Phase II points. Here the
maximum occurrence is in the 0-to-6-inch level and none occurred below
the 18-to-24-inch level. That some degree of overlap is present can be
expected, assuming our interpretation of the erosional history of the Tank
Site is correct (Treganza and Malamud, 1950, p. 131). In any stratified
site, unless the cultural levels are separated by a sterile layer of some
thickness some degree of cultural mixing may be anticipated. Previously
unknown to us was the fact that Mr. Trujillo had plowed the site in
earlier days and this, plus rodent activities, could have brought about
considerable mixing in the upper 12 inches of the deposit. Though less
digging was done in the Phase II site LAn-2, it is significant to note
that only the small pressure-flaked projectile points were present. In
form and material they resemble in near exactness the material from the
0-to-12-inch level of the Tank Site (pl. 23, _f-m_).

Two specimens, a large blade and large point (pl. 22, _a_, _b_), have
tentatively been assigned to Phase II though there may be some doubt as to
their cultural provenience. The blade, composed of a dark-brown chert,
shows considerable pressure-flaking skill as evidenced by the serrations
along both margins. The large point composed of obsidian lacks refinement
in flaking but shows little or no evidence of surface alteration
(patination). Also, both these types are of not uncommon occurrence in the
coastal shell middens that can be assigned to periods of less antiquity
than the Tank Site.

Assigned to Phase I are three heavy points which, because of their nature,
stand in contrast to the typical patinated basalt specimens; yet their
association in the site deposit is such that they must be considered along
with other projectile points as belonging to the Phase I period. Plate 21,
_l_, illustrates a dark-brown chert blade with a concave base which was
flaked either by controlled percussion or a rough-pressure technique. This
specimen was found in direct association with an extended burial of the
Phase I type (Treganza and Malamud, 1950, pl. 15, _f_; pl. 21, _i_), and
hence has been assigned to this period. Though its presence appears out of
character with the heavy basalt examples, this association is not
necessarily unique, for almost an identical example may be noted for the
Lake Mohave Culture (Campbell _et al._, 1937, pl. XLIV, _e_; pl. XLV,
_d_). A second specimen composed of a white chert and having a broad
angular stem base finds no other parallels in the Topanga area (pl. 21,
_k_), yet it too occurs in the Lake Mohave area where such forms are
classed as a Silver Lake type (_ibid._, pl. XLII, _d_). The third specimen
is composed of a thin piece of laminated chert, leaf-shaped in form, and
displays only slight marginal flaking in its original shaping. This
example was recovered at a depth of 60 inches and marks the greatest depth
of any projectile point recovered from the Tank Site.

[Illustration: Figure 4. Projectile Points]


  Table 4

  Projectile Points

  =========================================================================
           |              Occurrence by depth (in in.)               |
  Points   |---------------------------------------------------------|
           |0-6  6-12 12-18 18-24 24-30 30-36 36-42 42-48 48-54 54-60|Total
  ---------|---------------------------------------------------------|-----
           |                  _Phase II_                             |
  Side-    |                                                         |
    notched|...    3   ...   ...   ...   ...   ...   ...   ...   ... |   3
  Contract-|                                                         |
    ing    |                                                         |
    stem   |  3    4     2   ...   ...   ...   ...   ...   ...   ... |   9
  Lozenge  |  9    3     2   ...   ...   ...   ...   ...   ...   ... |  14
  Fragments| 26   14     5     1   ...   ...   ...   ...   ...   ... |  46
  ---------|---------------------------------------------------------|-----
    Total  | 38   24     9     1     0     0     0     0     0     0 |  72
  ---------|---------------------------------------------------------------
  Blades and large points
  ---------|---------------------------------------------------------------
           |                  _Phase I_                              |
  Blades   |...    3     6     1     1     1   ...     1     1   ... |  14
  Large    |
    points |  2    4     2   ...   ...     1   ...     1     1     1 |  12
  ---------|---------------------------------------------------------|-----
    Total  |  2    7     8     1     1     2     0     2     2     1 |  26
  -------------------------------------------------------------------------


_Small "Dart" Points_

_Side-notched points (pl. 22, c, d, e)._--A single example differs in some
degree with specimens recovered last season. It is smaller, having a
length of 3 cm. and with a slightly concave base. Though this is a surface
specimen composed of obsidian, the surface has been so highly patinated
that it bears little resemblance to its parent material (pl. 22, _d_).

_Contracting-stem points (pl. 22, f, g, j, k)._--This type has some
latitude in respect to the shape of the stem and some refinement probably
could be made. Some specimens have well-defined shoulders and are with
stems which contract to a sharp point (pl. 22, _g_, _k_), being
reminiscent of points associated with the Hunting and Canalino cultures of
the Santa Barbara coast. In other instances shoulders are less
well-defined, or the stems terminate in more rounded bases. The lengths
range from 2.7 cm. to 4.2 cm. The materials include basalt, chert,
chalcedony, and obsidian.

_Lozenge points (pl. 22, h, i, l-u)._--Numerically this group constitutes
the largest class of the small projectile points. Were a larger series
present, some refinement of types might be attempted. Of the fourteen
specimens, some tend toward diamond shapes, whereas others border small
leaf or stem forms. Lengths range from 2.5 cm. to 4.1 cm. Materials used
are obsidian, basalt, chert, and quartz.


_Large Blades and Large Points_

The large blades and points collected this season show some variation over
those of last year, both in finishing technique, form, and material.
Frequently, for lack of established terminology, it is difficult to
distinguish between what might be termed a chipped knife, leaf-shaped
blade, or a coarsely made projectile point. We attempt only a rough
breakdown between blades and large points, either of which if hafted could
serve the purpose of a knife. All specimens are illustrated and may be
judged by the observer.

Described below are only those additional specimens collected this year.
For full details the 1950 report should be consulted.

_Large blades (pl. 21, a-g)._--

    1. This specimen comes from a depth of 48 to 54 inches, marking the
    deepest level from which any blade was taken. Though it shows an old
    break, enough remains to offer a computed length. The form is
    leaf-shaped and probably pointed at both ends. Computed length, 9.2
    cm.; width, 4.6 cm.; thickness, 1.2 cm. Material is basalt (pl. 21,
    _b_).

    2. Basal half of what was probably a leaf-shaped blade. Incomplete
    length, 4.5 cm.; width, 5.4 cm.; and 1.4 cm. thick. Material is basalt
    (pl. 21, _c_).

    3. Larger half of a basalt blade, showing some attempt to reshape the
    broken margin. Incomplete length, 7 cm.; width, 4.5 cm.; and 1.5 cm.
    thick (pl. 21, _a_).

    4. This chert specimen exhibits the best flaking technique of any
    large blades from the Tank Site. Compared with the patinated basalt
    examples, considerable contrast exists. Typologically this specimen is
    similar to forms typical of the Hunting Culture of the Santa Barbara
    coast. Because of its shallow position (6-12 inches), lack of
    patination, and flaking technique, we have assigned it to Phase II of
    Topanga. The form is a willow leaf with slightly serrated edges.
    Length, 14.9 cm.; width, 3.4 cm.; and 1.5 cm. long. Material is a
    dark-brown chert (pl. 22, _a_).

_Large points (pl. 21, h-l; pl. 22, b)._--

    1. This specimen, like the blade above, also deviates to some degree
    from other large points. It is composed of an unaltered obsidian and
    comes from the 0-to-6-inch level of the deposit. Because of its
    shallow depth and contrastive nature, it has been assigned to Phase
    II. The form is leaf-shaped, being more pointed at one end. Length, 7
    cm.; width, 3 cm.; and 1.3 cm. thick (pl. 22, _b_).

    2. Specimen made from a thin piece of banded, laminated chert.
    Shaping was done merely by marginal flaking, as the original surface
    shows no working. Coming from a depth of 60 inches, this marks the
    greatest depth of any large point. Length, 5.4 cm.; width, 2.8 cm.;
    and 5 cm. thick (pl. 21, _j_).

    3. Basal fragment of a large blade. This broad, angular base is a
    unique occurrence for the Tank Site, though some parallels may be
    noted in Lake Mohave specimens. This single piece possesses sharp,
    angular shoulders that terminate in a broad, flat, angular base. The
    material is a white chert (pl. 21, _k_).

[Illustration: Figure 5. Metate Types]




GROUND OR PECKED STONE


_Manos and Metates_

As heretofore, manos far outnumber metates in the deposit. An explanation
of this inequitable representation of milling stones has already been
discussed in some detail (Treganza and Malamud, 1950; p. 140), _viz._,
that the more rapid wear of the nether stone periodically called for manos
of somewhat varying shapes to conform to the changing contour of the
metate throughout its serviceable life. Proof to substantiate this thesis
is lacking, but it appears to be a reasonable possibility. Also, the
practice of pecking manos to increase the effectiveness of their grinding
surfaces must have resulted in considerable breakage, as judged by the
large number of fragments.

Of 2,556 manos and 329 metates, whole and fragmentary, 962 and 79
respectively, were classifiable. The descriptive categories derived from
the 1947 data proved adequate in defining the limits of variability and
patterning displayed by our recent acquisitions. Some pieces exhibit
technological refinement of types earlier described.

_Metates_

Metates are of three types, called here deep basin, shallow basin, and
flat slab. As was true last season, the material is predominantly
sandstone for all three forms.

_Type I, deep basin (fig. 5, a, c, e)._--These are the most abundant.
Fifteen complete specimens and seventeen fragments were recovered. In both
form and size there exists a close parallel between this type and those
associated with the Oak Grove Culture of the Santa Barbara area.

_Type II, shallow basin (fig. 5, b, d; pl. 18, c right)._--This type is
represented by fifteen complete and eleven fragments.

_Type III, slab (fig. 5, f; pl. 18, c)._--Like type II, the slab metate is
less common, being known only through eleven complete and ten fragmentary
specimens.

The distribution of metates through the deposit was not as random as that
of manos. Many of the complete specimens occur among features or with
burials. Fragments were encountered throughout the excavation, but were
most highly concentrated in features consisting of large aggregates of
stone. No depth table has been presented for metates, as it is assumed
that the mano distribution reflects a more complete picture for these
related tools; however, the deep-basin form seems to occur at the greatest
depth.

_Manos_

Manos and mano fragments were so common in the occupational debris that
their association in features or with burials had little or no
significance. With the exception of scraper planes they were the most
frequent artifact group encountered. Their depth distribution (table 5)
suggests several noteable points. The highest frequency occurs in the
6-to-12-inch level, being represented by some 349 examples. From
0-to-36-inches there are 960 specimens but from 36-to-54-inches there are
only 2 examples. This would seem to indicate then that the early history
of the Tank Site was characterized mainly by a flake-and-core industry
with the mano-metate complex being exhibited only lightly at first and
then gaining considerable importance toward the latter periods of Phase I.
Excavations at LAn-2 would also indicate that the trait began to wane
toward Phase II and was gradually replaced by a mortar-pestle complex,
which continues to be characteristic on into historic times.

Manos have been typed largely on the basis of the number of faces that
exhibit wear, the nature of the worked or worn surfaces, and the general
form. Some eight types have been recognized.


  Table 5

  Mano Types

  ===================================================================
        |            Occurrence by depth (in in.)             |
        |-----------------------------------------------------|
  Types | 0-6  6-12 12-18 18-24 24-30 30-36 36-42 42-48 48-54 | Total
  ------|-----------------------------------------------------|------
    IA  |  28   25    17    10     1   ...   ...   ...     1  |    82
    IB  |  12   26    12     8     2   ...   ...   ...   ...  |    60
    IC  |  10   13    10     6     3   ...   ...   ...   ...  |    42
   IIA  |  31   51    19     9     4     2   ...   ...   ...  |   116
   IIB  |  54  106    76    31    11     2   ...   ...   ...  |   280
   IIC  |  82   89    68    31    10     3     1   ...   ...  |   285
   IID  |  13   15    11     4     2     2   ...   ...   ...  |    47
  III   |   9   24    16     2   ...   ...   ...   ...   ...  |    51
  ------|-----------------------------------------------------|------
  Total | 239  349   229   101    33     9     1     0     1  |   962
        |                                                     |
        |                           Fragments not typable     | 1,556
        |                                                     | -----
        |                                                     | 2,518
  -------------------------------------------------------------------


[Illustration: Figure 6. Mano Types]

    I. Unifaced

      IA. Natural cobbles with wear on one surface. Cobbles range from
      symmetrical to irregular in shape: circular to ovoid in outline.

      IB. Extended form of type IA, showing excessive wear. Forms all tend
      toward symmetry.

      IC. Elongated "sugar-loaf" in cross section. Entire back surface
      completely smoothed.

    II. Bifaced

      IIA. Natural cobbles with wear on two surfaces. Symmetrical forms
      range from oblate spheroids to ovoid disks, others are symmetrical.
      In cross section wear surfaces are parallel to lenticular. Grades
      into type IIB.

      IIB. Same as IIA, but forms are elongated (length always much
      greater than the breadth).

      IIC. Wedge-shaped, ovoid to elongate cobbles. Angle between wear
      surfaces ranges from 5 degrees to 45 degrees.

      IID. Same as type IIC, but one surface is keeled as a result of
      superimposed wear pattern.

    III. Trifaced

      III. Long, narrow, triangular cross section.


_Mortars_

Newly acquired mortars are represented but by three fragmentary pieces.
Only one is of sufficient size to suggest an outer diameter of
approximately 12 inches, and all three appear to be of the cobble type
similar to the complete specimen collected in 1947 (Treganza and Malamud
1950, pl. 24, _a_). Considering the area excavated and the very small
number of both mortars and pestles that were recovered, it would be safe
to assume this complex was of little significance in the history of the
Tank Site. Their function was probably concerned primarily with something
other than the food economy, such as grinding pigments or functioning in
some specific capacity. Wooden mortars and pestles can not be totally
excluded, but the great preponderance of manos and metates would probably
preclude any serious assumption that mortars and pestles ever played any
important roll at the Tank Site.

Included in feature 18 was a spherical cobble 8 inches in diameter, marked
by a well-defined, shallow, circular depression. Its surface bears the
marks of shaping by pecking and some rubbing; the depression is
well-smoothed, as if worn down by constant use. We can not say whether the
piece is completed, as such; or whether, possibly, it represents a small
mortar in an arrested state of manufacture.


_Pestles_

Five complete pestles were recovered, providing a total of nine for the
two seasons. The specimens this year differ from those already known in
being more stylized, i.e., four are almost perfectly cylindrical and show
wear at both ends. All are made of sandstone and have gently rounded
pounding surfaces. Specimens 1, 2, and 4, as listed below, were found in a
single cache.

1. Shaped over-all by pecking, forming a slightly tapered cylinder,
somewhat bulbed at either extremity. Both ends evidence use. This example,
by far the largest recovered from the Tank Site, compares in many respects
to pestles associated with later cultures of the coast and interior.
Length, 31.5 cm.; average diameter, 6.9 cm. (pl. 24, _a_).

2. Entirely shaped by pecking and grinding. Two opposite sides somewhat
flattened by abrasion as if used as a mano on a slab metate, and resulting
in a somewhat flattened cylinder form. Both ends used. Length, 13.5 cm.;
average diameter, 6.8 cm. (pl. 24, _c_).

3. Similar to specimen 2, though more nearly circular in cross section and
surface shows no grinding. Length 16.5 cm.; average diameter, 7 cm.

4. Completely worked by pecking and grinding. Cylindrical form distorted
by slight tapering and dorsoventral flattening. Used at both ends. Length,
15.2 cm.; average diameter, 6.5 cm.

5. This specimen is composed of a highly weathered sandstone so that the
surface treatment is no longer discernable. Shaped to a truncated conoid
and apparently used only on the larger end. Length, 18.5 cm.; greatest
diameter, 8.5 cm.

These five specimens were localized in the southeast sector of the
deposit, and none occurred deeper than the 12-to-18-inch level. Numerous
Phase II projectile points came from this same general area of the site
and therefore there is some inclination to assign these specimens to a
late position in the Phase I with the probability that they are Phase II.


_Abrading Stones_

Two broad classes of abrading stones have been differentiated on the basis
of form and inferred function (Treganza and Malamud 1950, p. 147):

    I. Those that could be held in the hand and rubbed against some
    article being finished. These have smoothed, even-abrading surfaces
    that are gently concave to convex. They are clearly distinguishable
    from manos by their reduced average proportions, and the near
    consistent lack of pecking as a sharpening measure. That this latter
    characteristic does not hold without exception seems to be due simply
    to the fact that some of the abrading stones appear to be reused
    manos.

    One of the examples in the above category, originally a broken bifaced
    mano, has small, half-inch deep depressions at either end. These
    evidently served as finger-holds, for they effect a good grip on the
    tool.

    II. Those that, though quite varied in size, bear one or more grooves
    on their faces. The furrows vary in breadth and depth and appear to be
    a function, essentially, of the amount and kind of wear to which the
    artifact was subjected.

    Many of these specimens, especially those with narrow, V-shaped
    longitudinal grooves, would be classed as awl sharpeners had they
    occurred in sites of later origin. However, bone awls or pointed,
    worked bone in any form is absent in the Tank Site. It would suggest,
    then, that this class of abrading stones were involved in conjunction
    with wood working, the tangible evidence having been lost to us.


_Cog Stones_

Cog stones, because of their unique forms and restricted distribution, may
be useful as diagnostic elements for future comparative studies. As yet we
know little about their function or cultural associations in the rest of
southern California. Their temporal position appears to be a middle one,
as none occur in positive association with late or historic sites, and
conversely, none have been reported for Lake Mohave, coastal San Dieguito,
or Oak Grove. The Tank Site specimens represent the earliest known
occurrence, and even here their exact position as to Phase I or Phase II
is not fully known. Most of our specimens occur in the top levels (0-18
inches), though a single example was found as deep as 32 inches (pl. 23,
_b_).

We have suggested cog stones in southern California may constitute the
counterpart of the spindle charm stones of central California with the
south boundary of the Chumash marking the near southern limit of the
spindle forms. Material out of which cog stones have been made is of some
interest. The Tank Site specimens range through volcanic tuff, siliceous
sinter, escoriated basalt, to a fine-grained basalt. From other areas the
same materials are present plus sandstone, granite, and granodiorite.
Steatite, one of the most easily worked stones, appears to be absent.
Obviously the hardness and type of stone were of little importance. The
appearance of the finished product likewise varied. Some specimens are a
product of perfection, others of the roughest sort. Perforated specimens
might suggest hafting, but few are of this type.

The suggestion of a ceremonial usage of cog stones is not solely lacking
in evidence. In 1936-1937, under the Works Progress Administration, Mr. J.
W. Winterbourne excavated two sites in Orange County known as the Banning
Site and the Norris Site. The following are excerpts from a letter dated
April 13, 1939, to Edwin F. Walker from J. W. Winterbourne (we are
indebted to Mr. H. Eberhart for providing this data from his manuscript on
cog stones):

"I am enclosing some data on cog stones that one of the clerks gathered
from the field notes.... We have noticed several peculiarities regarding
this cogged discoidal. First, that the Banning Estate Site seems to have
produced as many of these stones as all the other sites where they are
found combined; second, that the stones in most cases are found in the
clay completely below the camp debris; third, that rarely have they been
found in association with other artifacts except the discoidal; fourth,
that they seem never to have served a utilitarian purpose as they are not
pitted or polished and rarely broken; fifth, if broken, in almost every
case the Indians attempted to mend them with asphalt; sixth, that the
material used in their manufacture is with few exceptions a vesicular
basalt which is found in outcrops in the San Joaquin Hills and at various
points in the Santa Ana Mountains; seventh, that the number of cogs or
depressions may vary three to twenty-five or thirty-eight, that the stone
may be perforated near the center of the planes or it may not be, but that
usually there is a depression near the center of both obverse and reverse
planes."

The following excerpts are from the same letter and contain more detailed
information regarding archaeological occurrences: "A decomposed burial was
uncovered four feet east of a cog stone and at the same depth.... Three
fine specimens were found close together under four oblong slabs of
fossilized limestone, a pectin shell and a blue piece of granite.... A cog
stone was uncovered twenty-five inches below the surface, 19 inches
northeast by north from a large metate, in plot #10-b. Upon further
investigation, the metate proved to be resting on the stones of a
fireplace from which a few broken human bones protruded. Twelve inches
north of the fireplace ... a mano was found with the cog stone."

The above excerpts were from the Banning Site. The following are from the
Norris Site: "Three cog stones, #39, #40, #41, were found at a depth of
39 inches. These cog stones rested in the clay on edge. Flat surfaces
parallel to each other. These cog stones were found close to a fireplace
about two feet square and also close to a burial ... two cog stones were
uncovered. These cog stones were one on top of the other and rested on the
clay which underlies the kitchen midden. A cog stone was found in test
hole #14 at a depth of 3-1/2 feet, 8 inches below the bottom of the
excavations in a pit. Abalone shell covered the top of the cog stone ...
three cog stones one on top of the other.... This is the first fragment of
a cog stone ever encountered in our excavation. We found a few with cogs
or pieces broken from them but the Indians generally made an attempt to
mend them. This would seem to indicate a ceremonial rather than a
practical use."

These instances serve to indicate such objects were held in high esteem at
least for the two sites mentioned. None of the Tank Site specimens was
patched nor did any two occur in the same immediate area; however,
parallels exist in the forms, materials, the near association of metates,
and at least two burial forms. Also, we recognize no utilitarian role in
which these curious objects could have functioned.

Last season's cog stones were all fragmentary. This year three complete
specimens were found.

    1. Beveled disk, biconically drilled. The specimen is indented at even
    intervals, resembling somewhat a perforated metal tapered gear or a
    fish vertebra. Height, 3.8 cm.; diameter at base, 8.8 cm. Material a
    fine-grained basalt (pl. 23, _a_).

    2. Slightly beveled disk. The periphery is grooved at even intervals
    producing a cog effect. Both the flat surfaces are slightly pitted at
    the center of the disk. Height, 4.7 cm.; average diameter, 8.5 cm.
    Material a rough escoriated basalt (pl. 23, _c_).

    3. Slightly beveled disk like the above specimen only more refined and
    with more grooves. Slightly pitted on both surfaces. Grooves appear to
    have first been made by a sawing technique and then later smoothed
    down. Height, 3 cm.; average diameter, 7.3 cm. Material is volcanic
    tuff (pl. 23, _b_).


_Stone Disks_

Discoids, like cogged stones, do not appear to have been utility items.
That there may be some relationship between these two groups in a
functional complex is attested by their direct association in the Banning
Site as reported by Winterbourne. Eventually they may prove to be as
important as cog stones in terms of cultural time-markers, though at
present little is known concerning their distribution.

Stone disks have been divided into two gross categories: (I) those with
flat to convex faces; (II) those on which one or both faces are concave.
In either group the sides may be beveled or straight (for illustrations,
cf. Treganza and Malamud 1950, pl. 24, _c_, _d_, _f_, _i_).

The three specimens recovered this season fall into the first group. All
are characterized by flat faces and all are made of sandstone.

    1. Sides beveled with the lower or larger face battered about the
    entire periphery. Height, 4 cm.; diameter, 6.5 cm. to 9 cm.

    2. Fragmentary specimen with straight sides and slight central
    depression on one face. Height, 4.2 cm.; diameter, 7.7 cm.

    3. Fragmentary specimen with vertical sides. Height, 3 cm.; diameter
    undetermined.

A barrel-shaped object of sandstone was recovered which, if it is a
finished product, should not be classed here as a stone disk. However,
there is some possibility that it represents a discoid in the initial
stages of manufacture, and as such it is without parallel in the
collection. Height, 6 cm.; diameter 5.9 cm. at ends; 6.8 cm. at middle.

There is no reason to assume that any of our specimens are in any way
related to the so-called "bowling" stones reported for southern California
in late prehistoric or historic times.


_Rubbing Stones_

This class includes small flat cobbles, showing abrasive wear on one or
both faces. They may be distinguished from manos by their reduced size
though many appear to look like "little" manos. None shows any shaping
other than through continued wear from use.

A minority of these pieces, thirty-four, are distinguished by the
development of a small centralized pit on one or both smoothed faces. In
some instances there is a single pit on one surface and two on the other.
Many of these pitted examples have been battered on their peripheral
edges, suggesting they were either reused rubbing stones or they served a
dual function of both smoothing and pecking. We are hesitant to call them
"pitted hammerstones" since many are made from a soft sandstone and would
be ill adapted to this function. It is of some interest to note that this
general type of stone implement occurs in central and northern California
throughout most of the entire cultural history of the more advanced
industries. It has been suggested that such an artifact may have been used
as an "acorn anvil" or in some way related to the preparation of the acorn
in the hulling process. Should this prove to be correct, then one might
expect it to be an ancient element in native California.

For future comparative work it may prove advantageous to make further
subdivisions by differentiating between pitted and non-pitted forms. We
have made no attempt to do so at the present time.


_Core Hammerstones_

Some investigators tend to place core hammerstones in a class with flaked
tools, but in the present paper they are classed as an artifact of pecked
stone. It is the great quantity of their occurrence which appears
significant, rather than how they are classed.

Hammerstones may be conceived as having two quite distinct functions: (1)
those whose function is primarily to remove a large flake through the
percussion method, such as the production of a core itself or a rough
blade, and (2) those hammerstones having sharp or semisharp projections
used to reduce to some desired shape rocks of a nonconcoidal nature, such
as pecking down the surface humps on a mortar or pestle in order to
develop symmetry; or the function may not necessarily be one of shaping
but merely to periodically rough up a grinding surface on a metate or
mano. There naturally remains the possibility that once a specimen of the
latter type had lost all of its sharp projections it could then assume the
role of the first type and continue as a useful tool (Treganza and
Valdivia, 1955, p. 20).

One problem of classification arises when we combine the process of
manufacture and the concept of use. If we assume a rough piece of source
material was purposely flaked down to produce a core to be used solely as
a hammerstone, the artifact by definition becomes a flaked tool. However,
at this point it bears no resemblance to a hammerstone, but looks more
like a chopper or just a plain core and frequently may be classed as such.
Once this core is used as a percussion instrument and has its sharp
margins battered back, it begins to take on the characteristics of a
hammerstone or a used core tool. If battering continues, the final result
is an angular nodule whose irregular, worn margins mark the former
presence of sharp bifacial flake edges. A well-worn core hammerstone is
also a worn-out specimen, at least in the light of its original function.

Of the 1,478 specimens from the Tank Site it is our opinion that their
resultant form is derived through means of their own function--that of
pecking. That such an implement was much in demand is evidenced by the
pecked surfaces of numerous grinding tools. We doubt seriously if
hammerstones of this type were manufactured as such, but rather we assume
any suitable core, rejected scraper plane, or chopper could have served as
a starting point, and an over-all examination of our specimens supports
such a thesis.

Emergent is the correlation of core hammerstones and the presence of manos
and metates. Noteably both these grinding elements are rare in the coastal
San Dieguito and in the Lake Mohave area but do occur among the Shoshonean
and Yuman groups who occupied the areas corresponding to these ancient
lithic cultures.


_Cobble Hammerstones_

Cobble hammerstones tend to be oval or egg-shaped and exhibit abrasion on
one or both ends. None exceeds fist size, and many are slightly smaller. A
number evidence additional use as a rubbing stone.

A varient of this form is slightly thinner and contains small bifacial
depressions that have been pecked into the more flattened sides and
presumably served as finger grips.


_Slate Pendants_

To date, worked slate was represented only by three nonperforated,
lozenge-shaped specimens, one of which displays a faint, crude rectilinear
design. The second season's activity produced no comparable examples,
though it added six pieces to the collection. These can be broken down
into three descriptive categories:

    1. Four examples, none over 2 mm. in thickness, too fragmentary to
    warrent reconstruction. Judging by the striations on their surfaces
    and edges, they were shaped by grinding. On each, one end tapers to a
    blunt point.

    2. A lozenge-shaped specimen containing three broken-out peripheral
    biconical drilled holes. Average length, 6 cm.; average width, 4.5
    cm.; 3 mm. thick.

    3. A single trapezoidal specimen with no perforation or abrasive
    marks, but shaped at its narrow end by chipping. Length, 12 cm.;
    width, 6 cm.; 3 mm. thick.


_Miscellaneous Artifacts_

Here, as in the first report, are included objects that constitute part of
the total cultural inventory, but as small or unassociated occurrences,
they require individual descriptions.

_Objects of Stone_

    1. A smooth, symmetric piece of fine-grained sandstone that, though
    incomplete, is recognizably spindle-shaped. In all probability it is a
    fragment of pseudomorphic _belemnite_ cast, but appears to be
    analagous to the spindle-shaped charm stones of the Santa Barbara
    Hunting Culture or to those of central California or to the single
    specimen recovered at the Little Sycamore Site in Ventura County
    (Wallace, 1954, fig. 38B, p. 114; pl. 24 _e_).

    2. Six clusters of quartz crystals, apparently segments of geodes,
    were recovered. Whether collected as a curiosity or whether they
    functioned as would a single large crystal for purposes of anamatistic
    power, as in central California, can only be conjectured. In 1947 a
    very small, terminated crystal was found in direct burial association,
    so there remains the possibility that at least single specimens had
    some ceremonial significance.

    3. Spheroidal cobbles of varying sizes were encountered, especially in
    association with features. None appears to have been artificially
    shaped either by pecking or grinding, and hence we assume they
    represent highly selected specimens collected from the numerous
    conglomerate exposures found in Topanga Canyon. Circumstances
    surrounding their occurrence offer no clue as to their possible use.

    4. Half of a biconically drilled chlorite-schist bead, 1.5 cm. long,
    and about 1 cm. in diameter. Both ends appear to be roughly serrated,
    but this feature may be accidental. That the bead was at one time worn
    on a string appears evident from the high luster at the juncture of
    the two conical drill holes.

    5. A perforated tip of a fossil shark tooth, on which the enamel is
    largely lacking.


BONE IMPLEMENTS

It can be said with certainty that bone tools in any form were not
characteristic of the Tank Site in either Phase I or Phase II.

From both season's work were recovered a single fragment of a bone awl, a
small section of polished bone containing a light drill pit, and the tip
ends of six antlertine flakers. The antler specimens all occurred in the
0- to 12-inch level and probably should be assigned to Phase II since
their distribution would coincide with the pressure-flaked projectile
points.

This near-complete lack of bone artifacts is a pronounced contrast with
later coastal and interior sites. In part it can be suggested that wooden
objects were manufactured at the Tank Site as a substitute for bone.


OTHER REMAINS


_Unworked Bone and Shell_

The nonhuman bone recovered consisted primarily of highly fragmented
cannon bones, none of which lent itself to positive identification. The
total bulk of such refuse was surprisingly low. We can make no claim that
mammal bone has disintegrated and disappeared in the course of time, for
human bone, though by no means well preserved, was relatively abundant in
small pieces (see features).

As has been pointed out, this scarcity of faunal remains lends support to
the thesis that at least large game animals did not serve as significant
staples. Smaller, lighter bones of rodents were even more rare, and even
these could have been postoccupation, since burrowing mammals were present
when we excavated. Only two pieces of bird bone were noted and both of
these were under an inverted metate.

In the deeper part of the deposit (below 12 inches) identifiable shell
remains were absent. Occasional small flecks of calcareous residue might
suggest the former presence of highly altered shell remains, but as yet we
lack a microscopic analysis to confirm this. In the extreme upper limits
(0-6 inches) a few obvious shell fragments were collected, but even here
such occurrences were rare.


_Fossil Remains_

Previously mentioned were a possible belemnite cast, which may have served
as a charm stone, and a perforated shark's tooth, probably used as a
pendant. Last season we observed numerous remains of some unidentified
fossil vertebrate and several marine shells.

Whether these remains indicate merely the former presence of an aboriginal
fossil collector, or whether they played some functional role, will never
be known to us. A large fossil fish vertebra is known to have constituted
part of a Yokuts rainmaker shaman's kit (records of the University of
California Archaeological Survey), and fossil horse teeth occur with
historic Wintu burials (Treganza, 1954), but the temporal separation
between these two historic groups and the Topanga Culture is too great to
offer any likely suggestions.


_Pigments_

Numerous mineral pigment sticks and granules indicate the considerable use
of such items, but other than the occurrence of hematite in moderate to
light form with some burials, little is known of possible additional uses.
As for body paint or surface decoration on perishable material, the
evidence of such use would not be preserved.

None of the pigment sticks was formed as a result of molding ground
materials into a paddy or brick, as is sometimes noted for California, but
rather, a good grade of mineral was originally selected, and, as pigment
was desired, it was ground from this parent source. Gradually, either long
angular or rounded forms resulted. Of these sticks of pigment 13 were
hematite, showing a color range from brick red to brown; 33 were limonite,
ranging from pale yellow to a rich orange yellow. Occasionally sticks of a
pink mudstone occurred.




EXCAVATION OF SITE LAn-2


This site occupies the same ridge as does the Tank Site approximately 350
yards west-northwest of the latter at an estimated 150 feet lower
elevation. The ridge narrows down to a slight saddle, providing a
semi-knoll upon which the occupational debris has collected (Treganza and
Malamud, 1950, pl. 14, _a_, _c_). For purposes of fire control the area
had previously been bulldozed, obliterating the exact limits of the
deposit. Mound soil appears to extend 110 feet east-west and 70 feet
north-south, and is 36 inches at its deepest point, some 15 feet southwest
of the center of the site. The midden thins out on the periphery more
rapidly toward the west than to the east. The deposit is loose, dark, and
sandy. No extensive ash lenses were observed, and charcoal, though it
appeared in small pieces, was not common. Surrounding the depositional
area, the markedly yellow sandy clay stands out in definite contrast. The
submound base is the same as the surrounding soils only slightly darker
from the downward leeching of organic material from the midden. Directly
above the site and to the northeast, a light-yellow sandstone outcrop has
been exposed to weathering for a considerable period of time.

Exploratory excavation was initiated in the form of a 12- by 3-foot test
trench in 1947. Continuing in the summer of 1948, it was found that more
thorough excavation would be warranted. A 5-foot coördinate system was
then superimposed on the partial excavated area (see map 3).

At the conclusion of the 1947 season there was reason to feel that the
Tank Site was stratified, though at that time without further data, or a
means of checking with another site, the evidence was not fully
convincing. However, in 1948 additional work on the Tank Site plus a
limited amount of excavation on the LAn-2 provided the necessary
information not only to show a definite cultural change in respect to some
elements within the Tank Site, but also that the Topanga Culture as it has
been defined underwent considerable change as it continued on into later
times. These changes as exhibited in LAn-2 consist primarily in a shift in
the method of disposal of the dead from extended burials to a flexed
position, a change in burial orientation favoring north, elaboration in
pestle types, absence of large crude blades, projectile points that are
small and correspond with the types in upper level of the Tank Site, and a
shift in material and variety of core and flake tools. It is upon these
differences that Topanga Phase II rests.

[Illustration: Map 3. Site LAn-2]


DISPOSAL OF THE DEAD

The method of disposal of the dead contrasts sharply with that of the Tank
Site. Of the four burials exposed, two were loose-flexed (pl. 17, _c-d_),
a third, tight-flexed on the back (pl. 17, _a-b_), and the fourth, though
incomplete, likewise suggested a flexed position. The use of a rock cairn
is shared by a single burial from the Tank Site, though in the case of the
former (burial 6), the cairn composed of manos and metates and other rocks
surrounded the burial; here the rocks lay directly over the burial. Like
the Tank Site, associated artifacts were rare. The only occurrence was a
single metate associated with the cairn in burial 4.

The condition of the bones was poor. Though more complete than the remains
from the Tank Site, the skeletal material was fragile and difficult to
expose, possibly due to the loose sandy mound matrix.

Burial 5 from the Tank Site possessed a slight flexure of the knees and
the dual burial 10 possibly suggests flexure. Both of these burials come
from the shallow area of the Tank Site and may suggest a parallel.

In other coastal sites, the burial pattern found at LAn-2 finds comparable
practices (Rogers, D. B., 1929; Rogers M. J., 1945; Walker, 1936; Peck,
1955; Wallace, 1954.)


  Table 6

  Burial Data on Site LAn-2

  ==============================================
                            |   Burial number
      Burial data           |-------------------
                            |  1    2    3    4
  --------------------------|-------------------
  Depth from surface (in.)  |  21   13   15   26
  Primary inhumation        |  x    x    x    x
  Loose flex on side        |  x    x    x   ...
  Tight flex on side        | ...  ...  ...  ...
  Tight flex on back        | ...  ...  ...   x
  Head pointed              |  NE  WSW   N    N
  Artifacts associated      | ...  ...  ...   x
  ----------------------------------------------




DESCRIPTION OF ARTIFACTS


FLAKED TOOLS

The assemblage of flaked core tools recovered from LAn-2 represents in
part a continuation of the lithic patterns as described for the Tank Site.
Such modifications as have been noted, plus other cultural changes,
constitute the basis for assuming this site follows the Tank Site in an
uninterrupted temporal sequence. This assumption is further backed by
stratigraphic evidence provided by projectile points (table 4).

Some core tools are also found in LAn-2 but do not occur either in the
total quantity, quality, or number of types as found in the Tank Site.
Many of the specimens exhibit a lesser degree of patination, though there
are some that are heavily patinated. Considering the great quantity of
tools in the Tank Site and its close proximity, it may be that the more
weathered tools were borrowed from the Tank Site. The majority of the core
tools were so poorly manufactured that at times definite tool types were
difficult to recognize. Basalt still appears to predominate as a source
material, but quartzite appears to have been of more common usage,
especially in the making of certain scraper types.


  Table 7

  Flaked Tools and Materials from Site LAn-2

  ===============================================
      Tools            | Basalt  Quartzite |Total
  ---------------------|-------------------|-----
  Scraper plane IA     |    5        2     |   7
  Scraper plane IIA    |   57        5     |  62
  Scraper plane III    |    9        3     |  12
  Side scrapers        |    7        3     |  10
  Straight-edge knives |                   |
    or scrapers        |    5       10     |  15
  End scrapers         |    5        0     |   5
  Snub-nosed scrapers  |    5        0     |   5
  Concave scrapers     |    4        0     |   4
  Unifaced choppers    |    0        2     |   2
  Bifaced choppers     |    9        3     |  12
  Core hammerstones    |   60        3     |  63
  -----------------------------------------------


Inasmuch as the tool types are the same as those set up for the Tank Site,
there is little need to redescribe them. The frequencies are listed in
table 6. The depths ranged from surface to 36 inches, but the distribution
of artifacts appeared to be homogenous, hence the depth has no
significance.


_Projectile Points_

Nothing from LAn-2 approached the large crude blades and points
characteristic of the lower levels of the Tank Site (LAn-1). Contrarily,
the material matches the small points that are typical of the upper levels
of the Tank Site (0-12 inches), and finds, in addition, parallel in the
later coastal cultures of the Santa Barbara region. All of the specimens
are pressure flaked and composed of either chert or obsidian. The eight
typable points represent too small a series, and the deposit is too
shallow to show any stratigraphic differences within the site.

_Lozenge points (pl. 23, i-l)._--Of the four specimens recovered, one
appears to have accidentally had a large flake removed from one side and
then undergone secondary chipping, producing a resemblance to a single
side-notched type. Their representative lengths are 4.0, 3.6, 3.5, and 2.9
cm.

_Side-notched points (pl. 23, g-h)._--These two specimens differ from
those of the Tank Site in that the base tends to be more concave rather
than convex. Only one of the Tank Site specimens showed a slight
concavity. These specimens differ somewhat from the side-notched concave
points that are typical of the protohistoric and historic period in that
they are broad across the base and proportionately short. Their lengths
are 3.5 and 2.5 cm.

_Contracting-stem points (pl. 23, f)._--This single specimen is larger
than those of the Tank Site and differs in that the sides tend to be
convex near the tip, concave at the mid-section and base, terminating in
well-defined tangs. Were it not for the well-defined tapering stem, the
basal portion would be concave. Typologically this type finds a good
parallel in D. B. Rogers' Hunting and Canalino specimens and a somewhat
lesser similarity to the Gypsum Cave material. (An extended discussion of
this type will be found in the conclusion.) Length, 7 cm.

_Convex-base points (pl. 23, m)._--This type is not represented in the
Tank Site series and is known here only through a single incomplete
specimen. It is a type not uncommon to the later coastal group.
Reconstructed length, 3.5 cm.

_Fragments of points._--Only two additional point fragments were
recovered, neither of which are typable.


GROUND OR PECKED STONE

Ground or pecked stone, like that of chipped material, evidences a certain
amount of continuity as compared to the Tank Site, but also changes
slightly. The number of examples and types is considerably less, perhaps
due in part to the proportional amount of digging done, though it is
difficult to determine, as the Tank Site might well be classed as unusual
in regard to its great quantity of implements. Where manos and metates
were of frequent occurrence in the Tank Site, they become rare here.
Though only two mortars and four pestles were found, it would indicate a
considerable statistical increase over the Tank Site, especially when the
amount of digging done in the two sites is compared. Slate pendants carry
through as do stone disks. No cog stones were recovered though they appear
to be an associate of the disks.


_Metates_

A slight shift may be noted in the types of metates. The shallow basin and
the slab take precidence over the deep basin. As to material and form, no
differences could be noted. The specimens from this site were not
weathered so badly nor was the inverted position common. The number of
each type recovered was as follows: shallow basin, 17; slab, 3; deep
basin, 2; and 19 unidentifiable fragments.


_Manos_

Manos, like metates, were not too numerous nor varied in form. The
finished specimens lack the perfection of the better made examples in the
Tank Site. Considering the entire grinding complex, it is evident that the
role played here was of less importance. This might be interpreted as
indicative of a slight shift in the food economy. It is difficult to offer
an explanation as to the direction or nature of such a shift, though there
is some evidence suggesting greater emphasis was placed on hunting. By
types, the following number of each was found: 4 mono-facial type IA; 20
bifacial type IIB; 3 wedge-shaped type IIC; and 1 type III, with three
worked faces.

The ratio of manos to metates is quite different here than at the Tank
Site. Here the ratio is 1.5 metates to 1 mano. Little explanation can be
offered to this reverse trend other than it represents a breakdown of an
older pattern as a result of a shift toward the mortar-pestle complex.


_Mortars_

The evidence for mortars rests upon two incomplete specimens. A single rim
fragment, composed of a fairly course sandstone, resembles the Tank Site
specimen, but having a somewhat larger diameter (about 10 inches). The
second specimen is too fragmentary to allow any reconstruction of size.


_Pestles_

Only four pestles were recovered. One, a complete specimen composed of a
diabase, was shaped by pecking followed by grinding. The specimen is 14.6
cm. long, tapering from 3.5 cm. in diameter to 5 cm. at the distal end. A
ridge forms a circular band about the handle, 3.1 cm. from the top, 1.6
cm. wide, and projects some 3 cm. The form has a phallic appearance (pl.
24, _d_).

A fragmentary specimen like the above type is too incomplete to afford
much information. It is composed of a coarse sandstone and has been
subjected to considerable oxidation from a fire.

Another fragmentary specimen 11.3 cm. long exhibited a well-defined convex
pounding end. One side shows evidence of flattening by grinding, and in
this respect it is like the cache of three small pestles from the Tank
Site.

An implement, hardly worked but apparently complete, is an elongated
cobble, nearly circular in cross section. The pounding end is convex,
showing considerable wear. The length is 19.7 cm. with an average diameter
of 8.5 cm.


_Rubbing Stones_

All of the seven specimens recovered were composed of flat cobbles,
spherical to oval in form, and worn on both sides. Of these, two have a
single concave surface and a single specimen was bipitted on both
surfaces. Size of specimens averaged 7.85 by 7.1 by 2.8 cm.


_Stone Disks_

A single representative with beveled edges ranging in diameter from 7.4
cm. on one surface to 5.5 cm. on the other, and 3.6 cm. thick, was found.
It is composed of a sandstone and is shaped by pecking and grinding,
resulting in a somewhat uneven form. Similar specimens have been
illustrated for the Tank Site (Treganza and Malamud, 1950, pl. 24, _c_,
_d_, _f_, _h_).


_Pendants_

Pendants are known only in fragmentary or unfinished form, none of which
resemble the types from the Tank Site. A single unfinished specimen,
composed of slate, is subrectangular in outline with irregular wavy edges,
the dimensions being 10 cm. long by 2 cm. wide by 5 cm. thick. On both
surfaces of the smaller end biconical drill holes had been started. The
entire surface shows evidence of irregular scratchy abrasive marks. A
single specimen composed of laminated shale is incomplete and suggests
merely a rectangular form. In addition, three steatite fragments appear to
represent some form of pendant. If complete, all would probably have had a
long tapering rectangular form. The thickness varies from 1 to 3 cm.


OTHER REMAINS

Shell and bone artifacts were absent; this may be partly due to the
limited excavation. No evidence of textiles was detected.


_Unworked Bone and Shell Remains_

Like the Tank Site, both these elements were rare, especially shell, which
is known only through two unidentifiable fragments. A few deer bones
occurred, the lower mandible of a wild cat (Lynx rufus), and the canine
and incisor teeth of either a fox or coyote. The preservation of mammal
bone, like that of human, was very poor.




SUMMARY AND CONCLUSION


The final Topanga report remains primarily descriptive in order to make
the data more useable for comparative purposes. Although this concluding
report describes some new material, adds considerably to artifact
frequencies, and defines Phase I and Phase II of the Topanga Culture, the
basic conclusions reached earlier remain essentially unchanged, and the
previous general conclusions need not be repeated here (Treganza and
Malamud, 1950). This summary is the senior author's opinion and does not
necessarily reflect the views of either of the coauthors of the Topanga
reports.

An extended archaeological survey in upper Topanga Canyon and its main
tributaries revealed ten additional habitation deposits comparable to the
Tank Site, LAn-1. More recent excavations along the adjacent coast and in
the interior valleys (Walker, 1951; Wallace, 1954; Peck, 1955) have
produced artifacts comparable to both phases of the Topanga culture.
Therefore, the Topanga Culture, as we have defined it here, is not limited
to the Tank Site but contains local expression as well as relationships
outside the immediate area.

The two phases of the Topanga Culture are derived primarily through
differences in projectile points and burial customs. Phase I is
characterized by large percussion-flaked blades and points (pl. 21) which
occur in the Tank Site (LAn-1) from the surface to 60 inches in depth with
the greatest frequency below 18 inches (see table 4), and no similar type
points or blades have been found in LAn-2. Phase II projectile points are
smaller, varied in type, and are pressure flaked (pls. 22, 23, _f-m_).
These points are confined to the upper 18 inches of the Tank Site and are
exclusive to LAn-2. There are three forms of interment in the Tank Site,
all of which characterize Phase I: (1) primary inhumation, extended, prone
or supine, head southerly; (2) reburial, segments of long bones only,
generally under an inverted metate; and (3) fractional burial with
interment of long bones only. By virtue of its deep occurrence the
reburial is the most ancient in the Tank Site (Treganza and Malamud, 1950,
p. 135, burial 8). Phase II burials are flexed, with no specific
orientation, and occur both with and without rock cairns. These burials
were all limited to LAn-2.

Since clear-cut stratigraphic evidence is lacking it is difficult to
assign other classes of artifacts as being definitely associated with any
one specific phase of the Topanga Culture. Some general statements can be
made. The large quantity of basalt core tools, especially scraper planes,
occur deep in the Tank Site and are far less common in LAn-2. Manos and
metates bear out the same relationship; however, both these types of
artifacts span the time gap from early occurrences to the historic period.
It is only when one or both of these elements characterize or dominate a
site, such as in LAn-1, that they have diagnostic or comparative value in
so far as the Topanga Culture is concerned.

Cog stones, discoidals, and crescentic stones, or "amulets," are unique
types of artifacts, and when found in the right association with other
artifacts may prove to be valuable horizon indicators. Cog stones and
discoidals occur most commonly along the interior margin of the southern
California littoral, and, where documented, the mano and metate are also
present. Crescentic stones, as an artifact type, have been most
objectively associated with the San Dieguito of the San Diego coast and
the San Dieguito-Playa (Lake Mohave) Culture of the eastern desert.
However, the crescentic stone in its various forms expresses considerable
latitude in time and space.

Certain elements in the Topanga Culture might be viewed as "_index
artifacts_" when they occur as associates. To have comparative value it is
the combination of traits which create the cultural pattern and not the
isolates. Phase I is characterized by a combination of extended burial
with the head south, reburial of long bones under metate, fractional
burial, percussion-flaked projectile points and blades, dominance of flake
and core tools, dominance of milling stones with wide variation in the
hand stone (mano), crescentic stones, stone cogs, and stone discoidals.
The latter two may occur late in this first phase. Phase II has flexed
burials with no specific orientation, an occasional rock cairn in
association, pressure-flaked projectile points constituting several types,
and dominance of the cobble mortar and pestle as milling implements,
though the latter may occur toward the end of Phase I.

Through lack of clear-cut stratigraphic evidence, all other artifacts
described for the Tank Site will have to be considered either as late
Phase I or early Phase II. Unless subsequent excavations at LAn-2 produce
data of a nature different than that already described, this latter site
should represent the type site for Phase II of the Topanga Culture.

Following the first published Topanga report, two village sites along the
adjacent coast have been excavated, both of which share comparative traits
with the two phases of Topanga Culture (Wallace, 1954, 1955; Peck, 1955).
Both authors were handicapped in making comparisons, since this final
report was not available. With future comparisons to be made, a
clarification of some statements might be in order. Wallace (1955, Table
I, p. 220) in presenting "milling stone horizon cultural assemblages" uses
nine broad comparative categories for five different geographical areas in
which each area is known by one or more excavation sites. The traits
listed by Wallace under the heading of Topanga are those characteristic of
Phase I with the possible exception of the mortar and pestle. "Few clam
disk beads" are also listed. The only shell artifact found in the Tank
Site was a single massive clam-disk bead which, because of its shallow
occurrence (4 inches), is probably a Phase II artifact.

Peck (1955, p. 70), comparing Zuma Creek with Topanga, mentions the
following as occurring at the Tank Site (LAn-1): "... hard calcareous mass
at lower levels." Reference must be to the nonculturally altered sandstone
base of the site, since the lowest portion of the cultural deposit, the C
profile, is rather soft (Treganza and Malamud, 1950, p. 130). Peck notes
burial markers as: "stone platforms, red ocher abundant, and flint tools."
Large aggregates of stone were common in the Tank Site and are termed
_features_, being composed of large quantities of boulders, whole and
broken artifacts, and frequently a segment of human long bone (fig. 1).
Frequently one or more metates occurred with burials. Red ocher was
abundant in small granules throughout the site and appeared more
frequently in the burial areas, but not to the extent as to class an
interment as being a red-ocher burial in the traditional meaning or even
as a burial marker. Flint tools consist of a single chert blade. Varied
silicates occur as artifacts in the Tank Site but not as grave markers.
Peck (1955, p. 70) also lists manos as occurring in pairs. Two was not
characteristic for the Tank Site as mano caches occurred, numbering from
two up to six (pl. 19, _a_, _b_).

It has been difficult to place the Topanga Culture in a compatible time
perspective with the other known early cultural assemblages of southern
California. Topanga, between its two phases, has elements in part
comparable to all of these earlier cultures but lacks a majority of
artifacts common to any one. Paramount for an explanation is the
"abnormal" quantity of lithic artifacts classed under the broad heading of
core and flake tools which occur in the Tank Site. Most characteristic are
scraper planes, choppers, and a variety of heavy-duty scrapers. Western
archaeologists fail to share any common understanding as to what these
artifacts mean in time and function. The many subvarieties into which
these major classes have been divided suggest they are more the product of
a too elaborate or overextended typology rather than varieties that have
cultural significance. In part, the Topanga papers make the same error in
attempting to describe objectively a large mass of data and at the same
time devise some system whereby not only the Topanga artifacts but other
materials could be made more meaningful in terms of cultural comparisons.
Needed is a reëxamination of the entire concept of "core tools" in western
North America. Earlier, few people recognized or reported such tools. Now
the other extreme has the artifact versus the "naturifact" and the talk of
culture in such loose terms as preblade industries.

Habitual thinking has perhaps contributed to the general idea that a
lithic assemblage of core tools characterized by percussion flaking has
come to represent both antiquity and a hunting- or skin-dressing economy.
This may be true in instances where the physical and the biological
evidence are sufficient to support such a claim.

The general antiquity of the Tank Site can be established on the grounds
of physical evidence but the great quantity of core tools invites
speculation to account for their occurrence in a nonhunting culture. Some
4,994 core tools were collected from the Tank Site of an estimated
presence of 50,000. This figure is exceptionally high, compared to other
southern California sites of assumed similar age. Greatest in amounts were
scraper planes and core hammerstones. Curiously enough, none of the
scraper planes, regardless of finish, shows any degree of wear of
battering on the presumed working edge or polishing on the under surface
as would be expected to occur with use. This is true of similar artifacts
from the San Dieguito, La Jolla, and Lake Mohave cultures. Possibly as a
fleshing tool no such wear would result, but evidence of skin dressing is
lacking with so little mammal bone occuring in the site. A wood-working or
plant-fiber economy likewise would hardly necessitate any great quantity
or variety of tools. The large pulping plane used to remove mescal fiber
from a leaf was rare even among the historic Diegueno.

To account for the large number of "core tools" in the Tank Site,
especially scraper planes, choppers, and core hammerstones, it is
suggested these tools are actually crude implements used in the
manufacture and maintainence of more refined implements directly
associated with the mass production of the food economy, that is, the
milling stones known as the mano and metate. The function of these
primitive mills is to grind, necessitating a rough contact between the
surface of the mano and the metate. When the surfaces are worn smooth,
caking of meal (acorn) occurs on the polished faces, resulting in the
reduced efficiency of the mill. Primitive peoples who have used the mano
and metate solve this problem in one of two ways. In the Southwest and in
Mexico volcanic scoriaceous or vessicular basalt is selected for either or
both the hand stone and the grinding slab. As wear progresses new holes
are constantly opened up on the surface of both the grinding tools and
hence the mill constantly maintains full grinding efficiency and is
self-sharpening. If granites, sandstones, or schist are used, as is often
the case, then on frequent occasions the grinding surfaces have to be
artificially pitted. To do this a core is made containing angular points
and edges and sharp blows are struck on the faces of the mano and metate,
removing small pitts (fig. 5, _b_, _f_; Treganza and Malamud, 1950, pl.
22, _b_, _c_, _g_). This latter technique of pecking or crumbling is the
same as that used to shape or reduce a stone to a desired rough form
preparatory to grinding as a finishing technique. It was discovered in our
own experience in the manufacturing of stone artifacts (Treganza and
Valdivia, 1955) that when a core hammerstone lost its sharp edges through
battering it was of little use, and continued use of such a blunt
hammerstone often broke the object being manufactured.

Where this pecking technique is used to sharpen manos and metates three
end products result in terms of exhausted tools and become part of the
camp refuse. Hammerstones occur as subangular nodules with battered blunt
edges; manos, when they are worn too thin, usually break in the process of
pitting, and the metate in time wears through or the bottom gets knocked
out resulting in a "killed" artifact. What has earlier been referred to by
many authors as the "ceremonial killing" of an artifact might also be
viewed as the end product of function.

It is noted that Phase II site LAn-2 shows a sudden decline in core tools
accompanied by a decline in manos and metates. Presumably the mortar
becomes a replacement.

Recovered from approximately one-tenth of the Tank Site were 2,556 manos,
329 metates, both whole and broken, and 1,478 worn-out hammerstones. No
clear breaking point could be established between an unused scraper plane,
which is really a core with one or more flat bottoms, and a partly used
hammerstone, or between just a plain core and a partly used hammerstone.
Probably most of our scraper planes might be considered potential
hammerstones. This being the case, the scraper plane may be just a "myth
artifact" growing out of the literature and typologies rather than being
an existing reality. This does not imply that all so-called core and flake
tools or even some scraper planes should be considered in the same light.
It merely points up the fact that Western terminology and typology might
be reëxamined. One exception might be considered in the Type IA scraper
planes (Treganza and Malamud, 1950, pl. 17, _a_), which, because of
symmetry, flat base, marginal and all-over surface flaking, are similar to
the classical forms of the San Dieguito Culture.

The possibility that this "abnormal" quantity of the core tools
characterizing the early phase of Topanga can be related to a functional
part of a seed-gathering economy relieves some difficulties in making
cultural comparisons, and provides a more realistic approach. Why Topanga
should have more core tools than other reported sites may also have an
answer. Some early archaeologists failed to recognize core tools and
naturally did not collect them. Sites immediate to the coast generally
have a split marine-land economy, and though the metate and mano are
present, the core tools used for purposes of pitting such artifacts are
distributed more widely in a mound mass charged with shell refuse. Often,
along the coast, beach cobbles and cobbles from marine conglomerate
provide the only lithic source close at hand, and a resulting tool made
from a cobble resembles more a chopper or a "teshoa" flake. This is
particularly true of metate-producing sites around Santa Barbara. The Tank
Site is adjacent to a massive basalt outcrop from which angular core tools
were manufactured. Thus, quarry refuse, and immediate lithic supply, and
an economy demanding a great many pecking tools, plus erosional factors
that might have concentrated artifacts in the course of time, can in part
help explain the great quantity of core tools found at Topanga.

[Illustration: Table 8

Suggested Chronology of Early Milling and Hunting Cultures of Southern
California]

Since Carbon-14 dates are lacking, Topanga can receive only a relative
position in a not too well understood southern California cultural
sequence. Cultural placement therefore rests upon the recovered types of
artifacts, the physical and chemical alterations of both mound mass and
artifacts, and the physiographic location of the Topanga sites in terms of
a paleogeographic environment. That two phases of the Topanga Culture
exist is shown by stratigraphic evidence in the Tank Site with supporting
evidence in the adjacent LAn-2 characterizing a Phase II period.

Recently a cultural chronology has been suggested for southern California
coastal archaeology (Wallace, 1955, p. 227, table 3). Earlier a similar
chronology was constructed (Treganza, 1950, table 8) which lacked recent
data but was more comprehensive and included possible cross-cultural ties
with the desert cultures of the southwestern part of the Great Basin.

Presented here is a modification and more limited view of the earlier
chronological chart (table 8), differing from the chronology presented by
Wallace mainly in the duration of time, and the inclusion of more recent
data. Without knowledge of two phases of the Topanga Culture and without
the aid of complete data, Wallace dates Topanga at about 2000 B.C. but not
over 3000 B.C. Sites (or cultures) such as Oak Grove, Little Sycamore,
Malaga Cove II, and La Jolla I are given a date between 0 B.C. and 3000
B.C. (average, 1500 B.C.). With more specific dating for the peripheral
areas, especially the central California Middle and Early Horizons, a date
of 2000 B.C. for Topanga seems far too conservative to fit comfortably
into any over-all generalized chronology for California. Likewise, if
Phase I of Topanga is related, as is suggested, to the San Dieguito of San
Diego County, and the latter is related to the ancient Lake Mohave (Playa)
Culture of the eastern desert, then the acceptance of a date of a little
over 3000 B.C. for these cultures would suggest the geologic dating for
ancient Lake Mohave as too early or that coastal southern California has
suffered a considerable cultural lag. It is doubted that either is the
case.

Though claims have been made for Third Interglacial occupation of the
southern California coast, convincing evidence is still lacking. The
organized cultural activities of man first appear as a combination of
shore-line and milling activities directed toward the collection and
preparation of food. This simple ecological adaptation could have occupied
considerable periods of time involving little or no cultural modification
in the direction of technological change. It does not seem to conservative
to date Phase I of Topanga between 4000 B.C. and 8000 B.C. and Phase II
with some overlap from 2500 B.C. to 5000 B.C.




BIBLIOGRAPHY


Campbell, E. W., W. H. Campbell, E. Antevs, C. A. Amsden, J. A. Barbieri,
and F. D. Bode

    1937. The Archaeology of Pleistocene Lake Mohave, SM-P No. 12.

Heizer, R. F., and E. M. Lemert

    1947. Observations on Archaeological Sites in Topanga Canyon,
    California. UC-PAAE 44:237-258.

Peck, S. L.

    1955. An Archaeological Report on the Excavation Of a Prehistoric Site
    of Zuma Creek, Los Angeles County, California. Archaeological Survey
    Assoc. of Southern Calif.

Rogers, D. B.

    1929. Prehistoric Man of the Santa Barbara Coast. Santa Barbara Museum
    of Nat. Hist.

Rogers, M. J.

    1929. The Stone Art of the San Dieguito Plateau. AA 31(3):454-467.
    Menasha.

    1939. Early Lithic Industries of the Lower Basin of the Colorado River
    and Adjacent Desert Areas. SDM-P No. 3. San Diego.

    1945. An outline of Yuman Prehistory. SWJA 1(2):167-198.

Treganza, A. E.

    1950. The Topanga Culture and Southern California Prehistory.
    Unpublished Ph. D. Dissertation. University of California.

    1954. Salvage Archaeology in Nimbus and Redbank Reservoir Areas,
    Central California. UCAS No. 26.

Treganza, A. E., and E. G. Malamud

    1950. The Topanga Culture: First Season's Excavation of the Tank Site.
    1947. UCAR 12(4).

Treganza, A. E., and L. L. Valdivia

    1955. The Manufacture of Pecked and Ground Stone Artifacts; A
    Controlled Study. UCAS (32):19-29.

Walker, E. F.

    1936. A Ceremonial Site at Porter Ranch, San Fernando. SM-M 10:98-104.

    1945. The Dig at Big Tujunga Wash. SM-M 19:188-193.

    1951. Five Prehistoric Archaeological Sites in Los Angeles County,
    California. SM Vol. VI.

Wallace, W. J.

    1945. The Little Sycamore Site and the Early Milling Stone Cultures of
    Southern California; A Ant XX(2):112-123.

    1955. A Suggested Chronology for Southern California Coastal
    Archaeology. SWJA 11(3).




PLATES


EXPLANATION OF PLATES


Plate 17

Phase II burials from LAn-2. _a._ Burial 4 flexed on back with associated
rock cairn. _b._ Burial 4 with cairn removed. _c._ Burial 1, flexed with
associated rock. _d._ Burial flexed on left side. _e._ Burial 10, LAn-1,
showing sets of leg bones from two individuals.


Plate 18

Burials, features, and artifacts from LAn-1. _a._ Burial 11, showing only
long bones and mandible fragment. _b._ Feature 21, showing metate
fragments and human long bone. _c._ Slab and shallow-basin metates. _d._
Feature 24, weathered metate fragments.


Plate 19

Features, LAn-1. _a._ Feature 25, a cache of six manos. _b._ Feature 14, a
cache of four manos. _c._ Exposed features in central portion of site.
_d._ Feature 15 and showing burial 10 in upper left.


Plate 20

Features, LAn-1. _a._ Feature 26, showing inverted metates, manos, and
core tools. _b._ Feature 22, showing deep-basin metate that has been
turned over, and manos, _c._ Feature 28, showing inverted "killed" metate,
metate fragments, and manos. _d._ Feature 23, showing large concentration
of metate fragments, core tools, manos, and fire-fractured stone.


Plate 21

Topanga Culture Phase I projectile points and blades from LAn-1. _a-i._
Patinated basalt specimens. _j._ Laminated chert. _k-l._ Chert. _m._
Crescent stone or "amulet."


Plate 22

Topanga Culture Phase II knives and projectile points. _a, b._ Chert and
obsidian knives. _c-e._ Side-notched points. _f, g._ Contracting-stem
points. _h, i._ Lozenge points. _j, k._ Contracting-stem points. _l-u._
Lozenge points.


Plate 23

Cog stones, drills, and projectile points. _a-c._ Cog Stones. _d-e._
Quartzite hand reamers or drills. (Specimens _a-e_ are from Tank Site,
LAn-1.) _f-m._ Topanga Culture Phase II projectile points from LAn-2.


Plate 24

Pestles and charmstone (?) fragment. _a-c._ Pestles from LAn-1. _d._
Flanged pestle from LAn-2. _e._ Belmnite fossil fragment or charmstone
from LAn-1.


[Illustration: Plate 17. Phase II Burials from Site LAn-2]

[Illustration: Plate 18. Burials, Features, and Artifacts from Site
LAn-1]

[Illustration: Plate 19. Features, LAn-1]

[Illustration: Plate 20. Features, LAn-1]

[Illustration: Plate 21. Topanga Culture Phase I Projectile Points and
Blades from Site LAn-1]

[Illustration: Plate 22. Topanga Culture Phase II Knives and Projectile
Points]

[Illustration: Plate 23. Cog Stones, Drills, and Projectile Points]

[Illustration: Plate 24. Pestles and Charmstone (?) Fragment]






End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Topanga Culture Final Report on
Excavations, 1948, by A. E. Treganza and A. Bierman

